ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry & Remote Sensing 57 (2003) 327 – 345
www.elsevier.com/locate/isprsjprs

A comparison of three image-object methods for the multiscale
analysis of landscape structure
Geoffrey J. Hay a,*, Thomas Blaschke b, Danielle J. Marceau a, André Bouchard c
a

Geocomputing Laboratory, Département de Géographie, Université de Montréal,
C.P. 6128, Succursale Centre-Ville, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3C 3J
b
Department of Geography and Geoinformation, University of Salzburg, Austria, Hellbrunner Str. 34, A-5020 Salzburg, Austria
c
IRBV, Université de Montréal, Jardin Botanique de Montréal, 4101 Sherbrooke Est, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H1X 2B2
Received 3 March 2002; accepted 12 July 2002

Abstract
Within the conceptual framework of Complex Systems, we discuss the importance and challenges in extracting and linking
multiscale objects from high-resolution remote sensing imagery to improve the monitoring, modeling and management of
complex landscapes. In particular, we emphasize that remote sensing data are a particular case of the modifiable areal unit
problem (MAUP) and describe how image-objects provide a way to reduce this problem. We then hypothesize that multiscale
analysis should be guided by the intrinsic scale of the dominant landscape objects composing a scene and describe three
different multiscale image-processing techniques with the potential to achieve this. Each of these techniques, i.e., Fractal Net
Evolution Approach (FNEA), Linear Scale-Space and Blob-Feature Detection (SS), and Multiscale Object-Specific Analysis
(MOSA), facilitates the multiscale pattern analysis, exploration and hierarchical linking of image-objects based on methods that
derive spatially explicit multiscale contextual information from a single resolution of remote sensing imagery. We then outline
the weaknesses and strengths of each technique and provide strategies for their improvement.
D 2003 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: complex systems theory; fractal net evolution approach; image-objects; multiscale object-specific analysis

1. Introduction
Landscapes are complex systems composed of a
large number of heterogeneous components that interact in a non-linear way and exhibit adaptive properties
through space and time. In addition, complex systems
exhibit characteristics of emergent properties, multi-

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-514-343-8073; fax: +1-514343-8008.
E-mail address: ghay@sympatico.ca (G.J. Hay).

scale hierarchical interactions, unexpected behavior
and self-organization (Forman, 1995; Wu and Marceau, 2002), all of which produce characteristic patterns that (appear to) change depending on their scale
of observation (Allen and Starr, 1982). Thus, the roles
of the observer and of scale are fundamental in
recognizing these patterns, which in turn are necessary
for understanding the processes that generated them.
Conceptually, scale corresponds to a ‘window of
perception’. More practically, scale represents a measuring tool composed of two distinct components:
grain and extent. Grain refers to the smallest intervals

0924-2716/03/$ - see front matter D 2003 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/S0924-2716(02)00162-4

328

G.J. Hay et al. / ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry & Remote Sensing 57 (2003) 327–345

in an observation set, while extent refers to the range
over which observations at a particular grain are made
(O’Neill and King, 1997). From a remote sensing
perspective, grain is equivalent to the spatial, spectral
and temporal resolution of the pixels composing an
image, while extent represents the total area, combined bandwidths and temporal duration covered
within the scene (Hay et al., 2001). In addition,
remote sensing platforms are the primary data source
from which landscape patterns can be assessed. Therefore, to fully understand, monitor, model and manage
our interaction within landscapes, three components
are required: (1) remote sensing data with a fine
enough grain and broad enough extent to define
multiscale landscape patterns; (2) methods and theory
capable of identifying pattern components, i.e., realworld objects at their respective scales of expression;
and (3) the ability to link and query these objects
within appropriate hierarchical structures. In this
paper, small or fine scale refers to a small measure,
i.e., pixel size or area, while large or coarse scale
refers to a large measure.
Multiscale analysis is composed of two fundamental components: (1) the generation of a multiscale
representation and (2) information extraction. To
achieve the innate pattern recognition abilities of
humans, a number of image-processing techniques
have been developed that incorporate concepts and
theory from computer vision and machine learning.
These include edge detectors (Canny, 1986), mathematical morphology (Haralick et al., 1987), texture
analysis (Hay et al., 1996), spectral unmixing (Settle
and Drake, 1993), neural nets (Foody, 1999), Bayesian networks (Robert, 2001), fuzzy logic (Wang,
1990) and multiscale techniques such as pyramids
(Jähne, 1999), wavelets (Salari and Ling, 1995) and
fractals (Chaudhuri and Sarkar, 1995). However,
results from these methods often fall short when
compared with those of human vision. This is in part
because the majority of these techniques do not
generate explicit object topology, or even incorporate
the concept of object within their analysis. Yet this is
innate to humans (Biederman, 1987). Furthermore,
when these techniques are applied to remote sensing
data, their output are typically used only as additional
information channels in per-pixel classification techniques of multidimensional feature space, rather than
in object delineation (Skidmore, 1999). While many

of these techniques provide interesting and useful
results over a single scale, or narrow range of scales,
the ability to apply these methods for the automatic
analysis of multiscale landscape patterns and the
hierarchical linking of their components through a
scale continuum is not well defined (Hay et al., 1997).
Remote sensing images are composed of pixels,
not objects and there are no explicit scaling laws that
define where to scale to and from within an image, the
number of scales to assess, or the appropriate upscaling method(s) to use (Hay et al., 2001). To overcome
these limitations, we hypothesize that the analysis of
multiscale landscape structure should be guided by the
intrinsic scale of the varying sized image-objects that
compose a scene. To facilitate this, we provide a brief
background on the modifiable areal unit problem
(MAUP), image-objects and hierarchy (Section 2).
We then describe three different multiscale techniques: the Fractal Net Evolution Approach (FNEA),
Linear Scale-Space and Blob-Feature Detection (SS),
and Multiscale Object-Specific Analysis (MOSA)
(Section 3). Each of these techniques facilitates the
multiscale pattern analysis, exploration and hierarchical linking of image-objects based on methods that
derive spatially explicit, multiscale contextual information from a single remote sensing image. Finally,
we outline the strengths and weaknesses of each
technique and provide strategies for their improvement (Section 4).

2. Background: MAUP, image-objects and
hierarchy
2.1. Remote sensing and the modifiable areal unit
problem
While remote sensing data are often visually
impressive, they also correspond to an arbitrary spatial
sampling of the landscape and thus represent a particular case of the MAUP (Marceau et al., 1994). The
MAUP originates from the use of arbitrarily defined
spatial units for data acquisition and analysis. The
consequence is that data and results achieved from
them are dependent upon the spatial units, i.e., pixels,
used to collect them (Openshaw, 1981, 1984; Marceau, 1999). Though recognized in the Social and
Natural Sciences for several decades (Openshaw and

G.J. Hay et al. / ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry & Remote Sensing 57 (2003) 327–345

Taylor, 1979), we suggest that few understand the real
challenges this poses, especially when multiscale
analysis is applied to remotely sensed data (for an in
depth review of MAUP, see Marceau, 1999; Marceau
and Hay, 1999). Fortunately, several solutions to the
MAUP have been proposed. In particular, the use of
objects represents the clearest way out of MAUP, as
an analyst works with spatially discrete entities rather
than arbitrarily defined areal units (Fotheringham and
Wong, 1991; Hay et al., 2001). However, a remote
sensing image is not composed of spatially discrete
real-world entities that contain explicit object topology. Instead, its fundamental primitive is typically
a square pixel that only exhibits simple topological
adjacency.
2.2. Image-objects
Despite this topological limitation, humans can
cognitively group similar toned and spatially arranged
pixels into meaningful image-objects that correspond
to real-world entities within the geographic extent of
the scene being assessed. The term image-objects
(Hay and Niemann, 1994; Hay et al., 1997, 2001)
refers to individually resolvable entities located within
a digital image that are perceptually generated from
high-resolution pixel groups. According to Woodcock
and Strahler (1987), High-resolution (H-res) corresponds to the situation where a single real-world
object is visually modeled by many individual pixels;
whereas low-resolution (L-res) implies that a single
pixel represents the integrated signal of many
(smaller) real-world objects. In a remote sensing
image, both H- and L-res situations occur simultaneously. For example, in a 1.0-m-resolution image of
a forest canopy, where each tree crown exhibits a 10m diameter, each crown image-object will be composed of many pixels. In this situation, each 1.0 m
pixel is part of an individual crown; thus, it is H-res in
relation to the crown-object it models. However, each
1.0 m pixel will also be composed of the integrated
reflectance from many needles/leaves and branches;
thus, it will be L-res in relation to these individual
crown components. As a result, an image-object tends
to be composed of spatially clustered pixels that
exhibit high spectral autocorrelation because they
are all part of the same object. Consequently, they
have similar gray values. These characteristics corre-

329

spond to Tobler’s first law of Geography where
‘objects are related to all other objects, but proximal
objects are more likely to be related to each other’
(Tobler, 1970). In an image-object, this relationship is
both spatial and spectral.
2.3. Hierarchy
Similar to Tobler’s first law, Ecologists have long
recognized that in nature, many processes produce
clusters of entities that are typically generated by a
small set of self-organizing principles (Allen and
Starr, 1982). These entities emerge at specific scales
and result in visually distinct spatial patterns. Therefore, one way to understand, explain and forecast the
effects of natural processes is to examine these
natural patterns at their corresponding natural scales
of emergence (Wessman, 1992; Levin, 1999). To
assist in this task, the conceptual framework of
Hierarchy theory has been developed that builds upon
this idea of natural scales. Conceptually, a hierarchically organized system can be seen as a nested system
in which levels exhibiting progressively slower
behavior are at the top (Level + 1), while those
reflecting successively faster behavior are seen at a
lower level in the hierarchy (Level  1). The level of
interest is referred to as the focal level (Level 0) and it
resides between the other two. From a landscape
ecology perspective, Hierarchy theory states that
complex ecological systems, such as landscapes, are
composed of loosely coupled levels (scale domains),
where each level operates at distinct time and space
scales. Scale thresholds separate scale domains and
represent relatively sharp transitions, i.e., critical
locations where a shift occurs in the relative importance of variables influencing a process (Wiens,
1989). Thus, interactions tend to be stronger and
more frequent within a level of the hierarchy than
among levels (Allen and Starr, 1982). This important
fact enables the perception and description of complex systems by decomposing them into their fundamental parts and interpreting their interactions
(Simon, 1962).
However, to achieve this, objects, i.e., fundamental
parts, need to be clearly defined. Rowe (1961) distinguishes between two fundamental object types:
integrated objects and aggregate objects. Integrated
objects contain structurally organized parts, while

330

G.J. Hay et al. / ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry & Remote Sensing 57 (2003) 327–345

aggregate objects occupy a common area, but have no
structural organization. Furthermore, integrated
objects have intrinsic scale, whereas aggregates do
not. From a remote sensing perspective, imageobjects are integrated objects that exhibit an intrinsic
scale and are composed of structurally connected
parts, i.e., H-res pixels. To understand how imageobjects interact within and across scale domains, we
need techniques to automatically define them in
remote sensing data and the ability to link them
within appropriate hierarchical structures—thus reducing MAUP. The primary unknowns to achieve
this are:

3. Materials and methods
In this section, we introduce the study site and data
set used. We then briefly describe three different
image-processing approaches, each of which facilitates the multiscale pattern analysis, exploration and
hierarchical linking of image-objects, from a single
resolution of remote sensing imagery. They are
referred to as Fractal Net Evolution Approach
(FNEA), Linear Scale-Space and Blob-Feature Detection (SS), and Multiscale Object-Specific Analysis
(MOSA).
3.1. Study site and data set



What are the ‘optimal’ scales to evaluate the
varying sized, shaped and spatially distributed
image-objects within a scene?
 At what scales should hierarchies be established?
We suggest that there is no single ‘optimal’ scale
for analysis. Rather there are many optimal scales that
are specific to the image-objects that exist/emerge
within a scene (Hay and Niemann, 1994; Hay et al.,
1997, 2001). Therefore, we hypothesize that multiscale analysis should be guided by the intrinsic scale
of the dominant landscape objects, i.e., image-objects,
composing a scene.

The data used throughout this paper is a 500  500
pixel sub-image of an IKONOS-2 (Geo) scene
acquired in August 2001 (Fig. 1a). Geographically,
this area represents a portion of the highly fragmented agro-forested landscape typical of the Haut
Saint-Laurent region of southwest Quebec, Canada
(Fig. 1b). IKONOS-2 provides 11-bit multispectral
data in the red, green, blue and near-infrared (NIR)
channels at 4.0 m spatial resolution and an 11-bit
panchromatic (PAN) channel at 1.0 m resolution. Due
to the computational demands required by SS processing (Section 3.3), all data were linearly scaled to

Fig. 1. IKONOS-2 sub-image and study site map: (a) a 500  500 pixel IKONOS-2 image of the study site; (b) map location of the image.

G.J. Hay et al. / ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry & Remote Sensing 57 (2003) 327–345

8-bit. Since the PAN channel covers a significant
portion of the wavelengths represented by the four
multispectral channels, a geographically corresponding portion of the 1.0-m PAN image was selected and
resampled to 4.0 m using Object-Specific Upscaling
(Section 3.4), which is considered a robust upscaling
technique (Hay et al., 1997). During SS analysis,
only the single PAN image was assessed. During
FNEA and MOSA analysis, all five channels were
evaluated.
3.2. Fractal net evolution approach
The fractal net evolution approach (FNEA) is
embedded in a commercial software environment
(Definiens, 2002). It utilizes fuzzy set theory to
extract the objects of interest, at the scale of interest,
segmenting images simultaneously at both fine and
coarse scales. By operating on the relationships
between networked, i.e., linked objects, it is possible
to use local contextual information, which, in addition
to the images’ spectral information, can be combined
with image-object form and texture features to
improve classifications.
From a FNEA perspective, image information are
considered fractal in nature. Here the term ‘fractal’
refers to the same degree of non-regularity at all
scales, or self-similarity across scales. That is, structures typically appear at different scales in an image
simultaneously and exhibit commonalities (Bobick
and Bolles, 1992). To extract meaningful image
regions, the user has to take into account the scale
of the problem to be solved and the type of image data
available. Consequently, users are required to focus on
different scale levels because almost all attributes of
image structure such as color, texture, or shape, are
highly scale dependent. This is different from
approaches that do not require user-defined parameters, i.e., most region growing and watershed algorithms, multi-fractal-based segmentation and Markov
random fields. In cases where input parameters may
be required, i.e., user-defined cliques in Markov
random fields, or seeds in watershed segmentation,
the user does not explicitly focus on a specific ‘level’
or ‘scale’, rather they focus on certain heterogeneity
criteria for the resulting image-objects. In FNEA,
defining a specific level of analysis leads to defining
objects at a unique scale.

331

FNEA starts with a single pixel and a pairwise
comparison of its neighbors with the aim of minimizing the resulting summed heterogeneity. The common
solution for this pairwise cluster problem is global
mutual best fitting. Global mutual best fitting is the
strongest constraint for the optimization problem and
it reduces heterogeneity following a pure quantitative
criterion. However, there is a significant disadvantage
to global mutual best fitting. It does not use the
distributed treatment order and—in connection with
a heterogeneity definition for color—builds initial
segments in regions with a low spectral variance. This
leads to an uneven growth of image-objects over a
scene and to an imbalance between regions of high
and low spectral variance. To overcome this, FNEA
incorporates local mutual best fitting, which always
performs the most homogeneous merge in the local
vicinity following the gradient of best fitting. That is:
each initial pixel or group of pixels grows together
with its respective neighboring pixel(s), which results
in the lowest heterogeneity of the respective join. To
achieve this, an iterative heuristic optimization procedure aims to get the lowest possible overall heterogeneity across an image. The basis for this is the
degree of difference between two regions. As this
difference decreases, the fit of the two regions appears
to be closer. These differences are optimized in a
heuristic process by comparing the attributes of the
regions (Baatz and Schäpe, 2000). Thus, given a
certain feature space, two image-objects f1 and f2 are
considered similar when they are near to each other in
this feature space. For an n-dimensional feature space
( fnd), the heterogeneity h is described as:
h¼

rX
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ðf1d  f2d Þ2

ð1Þ

d

Examples of object features include mean spectral
values, or texture features, such as spectral variance.
These distances can be further normalized by the
standard deviation of the feature in each dimension
(rfd) using Eq. (2).
vﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
u 

uX f1d  f2d 2
h¼t
rfd
d

ð2Þ

332

G.J. Hay et al. / ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry & Remote Sensing 57 (2003) 327–345

The following overview represents a multiscale
approach as described by Lindeberg (1994) that is

composed of two principal components: Linear ScaleSpace and Blob-Feature Detection. For a more
detailed non-mathematical description of both, see
Hay et al. (2002a). Linear Scale-Space (SS) is an
uncommitted framework2 for early visual operations
that was developed by the computer vision community to automatically analyze real-world structures at
multiple scales—specifically, when there is no a priori
information about these structures, or the appropriate
scale(s) for their analysis. When scale information is
unknown within a scene, the only reasonable
approach for an uncommitted vision system is to
analyze the input data at (all) multiple scales. Thus,
a SS multiscale representation of a signal (such as a
remote sensing image of a landscape) is an ordered set
of derived signals showing structures at coarser scales
that constitute simplifications, i.e., smoothing, of
corresponding structures at finer scales. Smoothed
layers are created by convolving the original image
with a Gaussian function, where the scale of each
derived signal is defined by selecting a different
standard deviation of the Gaussian function. This
results in a scale-space cube or ‘stack’ of progressively ‘smoothed’ image layers, where each new layer
represents convolution at an increased scale. Each
hierarchical layer in a stack represents convolution
at a fixed scale, with the finest scale at the bottom and
the coarsest at the top (Fig. 3).
The use of Gaussian filters is essential to linear SS
theory as they satisfy necessary conditions or axioms
for an uncommitted framework (Weickert et al.,
1997). These include (among others) linearity (no
knowledge, no model, no memory), spatial shift
invariance (no preferred location), isotropy (no preferred orientation) and scale invariance (no preferred
size or scale). In addition, a Gaussian kernel satisfies
the linear diffusion equation; thus, Gaussian smoothing is considered as the diffusion of gray-level intensity over scale (t), instead of time.
The second SS component we use is referred to as
Blob-Feature Detection (Lindeberg, 1994). The primary objective of this non-linear approach is to link
structures at different scales in scale-space, to higher

1
Different possibilities for merging neighboring regions and
their respective heterogeneity are calculated in computer memory
(i.e., virtually), and then the candidate with the lowest resulting
heterogeneity is actually merged.

2
The term uncommitted framework refers to observations made
by a front-end vision system, i.e., an initial-stage measuring device,
such as the retina or a camera that involves ‘no knowledge’ and ‘no
preference’ for anything.

Eq. (3) describes the difference in heterogeneity (h)
of two regions (h1 and h2) before and after a virtual
merge1 (hm). Given an appropriate definition of
heterogeneity for a single region, the growth in
heterogeneity of a merge should be minimized. There
are several possibilities for describing the heterogeneity change (hdiff) before and after a virtual merge—
but they are beyond the scope of this paper. For more
information, see Baatz and Schäpe (2000).
hdiff ¼ hm  ðh1 þ h2Þ=2

ð3Þ

hdiff allows us to distinguish between two types of
objects with similar mean reflectance values but
different ‘within-patch heterogeneity’. An application
based on this type of heterogeneity was described by
Blaschke et al. (2001) where they used the mean
spectral difference between all sub-objects as one
example of heterogeneity applied to pastures and
conservation changes in a cultural heritage landscape
in central Germany. This involved a multiscale delineation of images and image semantics that incorporated image-structure and image-texture characteristics.
It was found that they could distinguish three levels of
delineation appropriate for three different key species,
which resulted in the construction of a hierarchical
network of image-objects and semantic rules between
these levels.
Since its recent introduction by Baatz and Schäpe
(2000), FNEA has been applied to various research
projects in Europe (Blaschke et al., 2000; Blaschke
and Strobl, 2001; Schiewe et al., 2001), many of
which have demonstrated the potential of this multiscale segmentation approach. In particular, the ‘realistic’ appearance (Fig. 2) of the resulting segmented
patches of forests, pastures, fields and built-up areas
have motivated several European agencies to seriously evaluate this approach.
3.3. Scale-space

G.J. Hay et al. / ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry & Remote Sensing 57 (2003) 327–345

333

Fig. 2. Three different levels of FNEA segmentation: (a) panchromatic IKONOS-2 sub-image (245  210 pixels) extracted from the top right
corner of Fig. 1a. (b) A close up of typical FNEA results using different segmentation levels. These levels roughly correspond to the smallest
units of interest, e.g., single groups of trees/bushes illustrated by bright gray lines. Medium-sized black outlines represent a medium
segmentation level, which corresponds best to ‘forest stands’. Bold black lines indicate the coarsest level of segmentation where semantically
different landscape objects have merged, but can still be exploited as ‘super-objects’.

order objects called ‘scale-space blobs’ and to extract
significant features based on their appearance and
persistence over scales. The main features of interest
at each scale within a stack are smooth regions, which
are brighter or darker than the background and which
stand out from their surrounding. These regions are

referred to as ‘gray-level blobs’. When blobs are
evaluated as a volumetric structure within a stack, it
becomes apparent that some structures persist through
scale, while others disappear (Fig. 4). Therefore, an
important premise of SS is that structures which persist
in scale-space are likely candidates to correspond to

Fig. 3. Linear scale-space ‘stack’. The finest scale is on the bottom and the coarsest scale, i.e., the most smoothed, is on the top. At the margins
of the right figure, the diffusive pattern of scale-space objects through scale can be seen.

334

G.J. Hay et al. / ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry & Remote Sensing 57 (2003) 327–345

Fig. 4. Grey-level stack, with opacity filters and pseudo-shading applied to illustrate the persistence of blob structures through scale (for
visualization purposes only).

significant structures in the image and thus in the
landscape.
In simple terms, gray-level blobs at each scale in
the stack are objects with extent both in 2D space (x,
y) and in gray-level (z-axis)—thus in 3D. Grey-level
blob delineation may be visualized as follows: at
each scale in the stack, the image function is virtually
flooded. As the water level gradually sinks, peaks of
the blobs appear. As this continues, different peaks
will eventually become connected. The corresponding ‘connected’ contour delimits the 2D spatial
extent, or ‘region of support’ of each blob, which is
defined as a binary blob (Fig. 5a). 2D binary blobs

are then linked over scale to create 3D hyper-blobs
(Fig. 5b).
Within a single hyper-blob four primary types of
‘bifurcation events’ may exist: annihilations (A),
merges (M), splits (S) and creations (C). These SSevents represent critical component of SS analysis, as
scales between bifurcations are linked together forming the lifetime (Ltn) and topological structure of
individual SS-blobs (Fig. 5c). Next, the integrated
normalized 4D volume (x, y, z, t) of each individual
SS-blobs is defined. The blob behavior is strongly
dependent upon image structure and the volume
depends on the scale. To normalize for this depend-

G.J. Hay et al. / ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry & Remote Sensing 57 (2003) 327–345

335

ency, statistics are extracted from a large number of
stacks generated from random images. These statistics
describe how random noise blobs behave in scalespace and are used to generate a normalized 4D SS
volume for each SS-blob.
Normalized volumes are then ranked and a number
of significant SS-blobs are defined, from which the
scale (t) representing the maximum 3D gray-level
blob volume (x, y, z) of each hyper-blob is extracted.
From these, the 2D spatial support, i.e., binary blob, is
identified. Thus, based on the underlying initial premise, 4D scale-space blobs are simplified to 3D graylevel blobs, which are further simplified to their 2D
support.
3.4. Multiscale object-specific analysis
Multiscale object-specific analysis (MOSA) is composed of three primary components: Object-Specific
Analysis (OSA), Object-Specific Upscaling (OSU) and
Marker-Controlled Watershed Segmentation (MCS).
OSA is a multiscale approach that automatically
defines unique spatial measures specific to the individual image-objects composing a remote sensing
scene (Hay et al., 1997, 2001). These object-specific
measures are then used in a weighting function to
automatically upscale (OSU) an image to a coarser
resolution. Then MCS is applied to these multiscale
data to automatically segment them into topologically
discrete image-objects that strongly correspond to
image-objects as though defined by visual analysis.
An underlying premise of OSA/OSU is that all
pixels within an image are exclusively considered Hres samples of the scene-objects they model, even
though, as previously discussed, both H- and L-res
exist. Thus, we use pixels—the fundamental image
primitive—to define the spatial extent of the larger
image-objects they are a part of. Hay et al. (1997)
noted that when plotting the digital variance of pixel
gray-values located with increasingly larger kernels,
Fig. 5. (a) Binary blobs at scale 20 (i.e., t 20). (b) A hyper-blob
stack composed of 2D binary blobs. For illustration only, each
binary layer has been assigned a value equal to its scale. Thus, dark
values are on the bottom, while bright values are near the top. (c)
Idealized hyper-blob illustrating four different SS-events: annihilation (A), creation (C), merge (M) and split (S). The number of scales
between SS-events represents the lifetime (Ltn) of a SS-blob. Five
different Ltn are illustrated.

336

G.J. Hay et al. / ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry & Remote Sensing 57 (2003) 327–345

while centered on an image-object of known size, the
resulting plot tended to produce curves with distinct
breaks, or thresholds in variance as the analyzing
kernel contacted the image-object’s edges. When this
‘threshold curve’ was reached, the corresponding
mean and variance values were also recorded for the

pixel under analysis within the defined window size.
This process was then locally applied to all remaining
pixels within the original image, resulting in corresponding Variance (VI), Area (AI) and Mean (MI)
images. This form of processing is referred to as
object-specific analysis. It is important to note that

Fig. 6. Variance (VI), Area (AI) and Mean (MI) from the first three scale domains SD1 – 3. These data correspond to the sub-image illustrated in
Fig. 2a. In the variance images, dark tones represent low variance, i.e., pixel groups that are more ‘object-like’, while bright tones represent
high-variance edges between two or more image-objects. Area images define the spatial extent of individual objects at a particular scale. Dark
tones represent small spatial extents, i.e., closer pixels are more ‘object-like’, while bright values represent large spatial extents as they are less
‘object-like’. Mean images represent the average of the H-res pixels that constitute part of individual objects assessed within each object-specific
threshold window.

G.J. Hay et al. / ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry & Remote Sensing 57 (2003) 327–345

337

Fig. 7. Marker-controlled watershed segmentation (MCS) results from the first three mean images illustrated in Fig. 6. Each gray-tone represents
a topologically distinct ‘watershed’ image-object.

the specific kernel size defined at each variance
threshold was strongly related to the known size of
the differently sized image-objects that each pixel was
a part of (thus, object-specific). The area values
associated with each pixel can then be used as part
of a weighting scheme to upscale an image to a
coarser resolution. This is referred to as object-specific
upscaling. The resampling criterion for OSU is premised on the relationship between pixel size, imageobjects and the point-spread function of modern
sensors3 and is further discussed in Hay et al. (2001).
Based on promising results from early research,
Hay et al. (1997) recognized that the application of
OSA/OSU rules reveal patterns that accurately correspond to the spatial extent of objects at the next
coarser scale. This led to the hypothesis (Hay and
Marceau, 1998) that by continuously applying objectspecific rules to the MI generated at each OSA
iteration, new spatial patterns will emerge that represent dominant landscape objects and that these patterns will correspond to real-world objects through a
wide range of scales.
To test this hypothesis, Hay et al. (2001) developed
an iterative multiscale framework that represents a
nested hierarchy of image-sets (ISt) consisting of two
versions of VI, AI and MI, each of which possesses
membership in a unique scale domain (SDn). They

3

The point spread function defines the ‘spread’ of an infinitely
small point of light resulting from lens aberrations as well as light
interference at the aperture.

recognized that there is often a range of scales
between the end point of identifiable scale domains
where certain image-objects exist and the point where
new image-objects emerge at their next scale of
expression. To exploit this information, the initial
framework was modified as follows: at the first
OSA iteration, every pixel is locally assessed within
progressively larger kernels until a local maximum
variance threshold is reached. When applied to the
entire image, this process generates the first image-set
(i.e., V1, A1, M1)—as previously described. In the
second iteration, each pixel in the newly generated M1
is locally assessed until a minimum variance threshold
is reached. The resulting images become the second
image-set (i.e., V2, A2, M2) where they represent the
beginning scale of all newly emergent image-objects
(Fig. 6). Recall that minimum variance indicates that
pixels are very similar; thus, the corresponding image
structures are most ‘object-like’. Consequently, oddnumbered OSA iterations define scales representing
the spatial extent or ‘end’ of objects, while evennumbered OSA iterations define the beginning scale
of the next emergent object that each pixel is a part of.
Therefore, the even-numbered OSA iteration (IS2) is
selected for upscaling (OSU) because it contains the
new image-objects we are interested in defining. This
entire OSA/OSU process is then repeated (iterated) on
the newly upscaled Mean images until the numbers of
pixels composing them are too small for further
processing.
The result of this iterative approach is a nested
hierarchy of image-sets (ISt), each composed of two

338

G.J. Hay et al. / ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry & Remote Sensing 57 (2003) 327–345

VI, AI and MI that have membership in a unique scale
domain (SDn). Within a single SDn, each image shares
the same grain and extent and represents the result of
multiscale analysis specific to the image-objects composing it. However, each SDn has a coarser grain than
the previous SDn  1 (due to upscaling), though it
shares the same extent through all image-sets. OSU
is applied to ensure that the original image-object
heuristics maintain the same conditions for which they
were originally designed and to reduce unnecessary
computation and data generation/storage.
Once OSA/OSU processing has been completed,
MCS is applied to the resulting Mean images (Fig. 7).
MCS is a watershed transformation technique that
detects regional similarities as opposed to an edgebased technique that detects local changes (Beucher
and Lantuéjoul, 1979; Meyer and Beucher, 1990). The
key characteristic of this technique is the ability to
reduce over-segmentation by placing markers or
‘seeds’ in user-specified areas. The elegance of integrating MCS within MOSA is that it requires data
inputs that are automatically and explicitly met by VI,
AI and MI. Specifically, the VI represents the edges or
‘dams’ that define individual watersheds in an image.
These watersheds contain regional minima, which are
naturally represented by the AI values due to a low
internal variance inherent to image-objects. Once each
watershed-object perimeter is automatically defined, it
is labeled with the average of the pixels located with
the corresponding MI, resulting in topologically discrete image-objects.

available that can be integrated within commonly
used image-processing packages. This has aided in
the development of a growing user base and novel
applications that range from Landscape Ecology to
Proteomics. Additional strengths of FNEA include the
following.








4. Discussion
In this section, we outline the principal strengths
and limitations of each technique. Based on this, we
suggest strategies for their improvement by integrating appropriate characteristics from the other techniques.



4.1. Strengths of FNEA, SS and OSA/OSU
FNEA software was developed to simultaneously
identify and extract objects of interest at different
scales within textured imagery, i.e., radar and H-res
satellite or airborne data, through multi-resolution
segmentation. A commercial software product is



The FNEA region-based approach involves generating a hierarchical segmentation at various
scales that yield satisfying results with respect to
the desired geometrical accuracy of image-object
outlines/boundaries and their unique class membership within a single region. In addition, several
studies illustrate that this type of classification
improves land-use classification results—rather
than land cover (for an overview, see Blaschke
and Strobl, 2001; Schiewe et al., 2001).
Another aspect beyond a simple improvement of
image classification is the potential to differentiate
‘object-classes’ within the same image ‘on-demand’ with different levels of detail for different
applications. For example, contrary to the static
view of a map, all forest areas in an image could be
treated as relatively homogeneous (although in
reality they are not) and grassland-objects could be
explored in greater detail or vice versa (Blaschke et
al., 2001).
FNEA offers the possibility to reproduce imageobject boundaries across different data sets, e.g.,
medium and H-res imagery, regional to local, and it
allows for a transparent inspection of results.
The definition of heterogeneity in FNEA allows for
both the description of an object by means of its
absolute heterogeneity, as well as the comparison
of objects according to the difference between
adjacent regions. By this means, the user can
compare different segmentation results and their
corresponding optimization procedures.
Image-object texture is expressed more explicitly
in FNEA than when using moving window texture
filters. Furthermore, a comparison of results
between FNEA and traditional region growing
segmentation algorithms indicates that FNEA
results in less over-segmentation within an image
and overall, produces far more recognizable imageobjects within the scene (Blaschke et al., 2000).
FNEA incorporates semantics based on user
knowledge. For example, if an object spectrally

G.J. Hay et al. / ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry & Remote Sensing 57 (2003) 327–345

corresponds to woodland and some of its direct
neighbors or objects within a certain distance are
classified as urban, then the object could be
classified as urban park.
Due to its non-committed framework, linear SS in
combination with non-linear blob-feature detection
represents a powerful, predominantly automated, multiscale object-detecting framework, the strengths of
which include the following.







SS requires no a priori scene information.
SS is based upon well-established mathematical
formulation and theory, i.e., group invariance,
differential geometry and tensor analysis.
 The use of Gaussian kernels satisfies the linear
diffusion equation. Therefore, the diffusion, i.e.,
smoothing, of the gray-level intensity over scale is
well modeled and understood. Furthermore, Gaussian kernels meet axioms required by an uncommitted vision system and they exhibit similarity
with biological vision. In particular, SS operators
closely resemble receptive field profiles registered
in mammalian retina and the visual cortex
(Koenderink, 1984).
 SS produces visually impressive and intuitive
results. The spatially explicit nature of these
results, i.e., binary-blobs that result from blob
feature detection, can be converted from raster to
vector topology for use in a GIS, in spatial models
and or by spatial statistical packages to evaluate
landscape structures and their associated metrics.
 The hierarchical nature of the scale-space primal
sketch lends itself well to multiprocessing and
distributed-network computing solutions.


MOSA represents a non-linear framework for generating a multiscale representation of a scene that
allows dominant image-objects to emerge at their
respective scales. This framework exhibits the following properties.


OSA/OSU was statistically proven to produce
better upscaling results than cubic convolution,
bilinear interpolation, nearest neighbor and nonoverlapping averaging (Hay et al., 1997).
 OSU incorporates object-specific weights, thus
minimizing the effects of MAUP.









339

It is based upon concepts related to how humans
perceive texture (Hay and Niemann, 1994; Hay et
al., 1997) and it incorporates ‘generic’ point
spread function characteristics in relation to object
size for determining an appropriate upscale
resolution for the next iteration of processing
(Hay et al., 2001).
OSA/OSU allows for upscaling between objects
and within an image hierarchy. The underlying
ideas and heuristics are conceptually simple, are
based upon strong empirical evidence, and follow
many concepts of Complex Systems and Hierarchy
theory.
For iterative OSA/OSU, no a priori scene information is required. Essentially, computation proceeds
until there is not enough information remaining to
upscale.
OSU takes into account the relationship between
the pixel size and the image-objects from which the
original OSA heuristics were developed. Thus, at
fine scales, results visually model known imageobjects very well. Therefore, a precedent exists
over results at coarser unverifiable image-scales.
Land-cover classifications improve with the addition of object-specific data sets as additional logic
channels.
MCS is well documented in the literature, and
watershed segmentation algorithms are commonly
available in popular image-processing packages.

4.2. Limitations of FNEA, SS and OSA/OSU
Although FNEA is already embedded in a commercial software environment, it cannot be fully
exploited as long as a theoretical framework remains
undefined and users have to find useful segmentation
levels by ‘trial and error’. In particular:


FNEA requires that the user must know the scale of
the objects of interest to select appropriate
segmentation heuristics. We suggest that this is
not reasonable when working at scales beyond
common spatial and or spectral experience, or
when conducting baseline analysis in areas where
no a priori information exists.
 FNEA requires a significant amount of exploratory
work to define the appropriate segmentation levels.
In addition, a unique solution for a single image is

340

G.J. Hay et al. / ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry & Remote Sensing 57 (2003) 327–345

not fully operational and transferable across scenes
without major corrections.
 There is no continuous upscaling mechanism for
scaling between hierarchical levels or imageobjects.
 There is no sound ecological theory presented for
linking/defining structures through scale.
The mathematical formulation of SS is extremely
rigorous. Unfortunately, this makes it nontrivial for
laypersons to understand. Furthermore, to the best of
our knowledge, no commercial software exists;4 thus,
image processing and topological tools must be
developed in-house, which limits its widespread utility. In this paper, all SS and MOSA programming
have been performed using IDL (IDL, 2002). Other
limitations include the following.


Pixel size does not change through scale; thus,
each stack represents large amounts of redundant
information. This poses a real challenge when
using large-scale remote sensing data sets. In our
work, hundreds of gigabytes of statistical (white
noise) processing were required before generating
normalized 4D volumes for a stack representing
500  500 pixels  200 channels. However, once
generated, these statistics can be stored in a
database and used for any other data set with the
same grain, extent, scale increment, and number of
scales.
 Within a stack, high-contrast features tend to
persist in scale, regardless of whether or not such
features have ecological meaning or meaning for
the application.
 Values for optimal scale generation, i.e., number of
scales in a stack, the selected scale increment, and
the number of ranked ‘significant blobs’ to
evaluate are all arbitrarily defined. We suggest that
these represent the most fundamental weaknesses
of this framework, because these values are critical
‘scale’ components from which corresponding
entities emerge. However, in most cases, reason-

4
ter Haar Romeny and Florack (2000) present a scale-space
workbook using the computer algebra package Mathematica (http://
www.wolfram.com). Code for edge, ridge and corner detection is
provided, but blob-detection is not described.

able assumptions can be made regarding the
number of scales to assess and their scale increment. But determining the number of ranked blobs
is not trivial. We allowed 20% of the blobs to be
ranked. This resulted in 2537 individual blobs,
many of which appeared to overlay each other
(Fig. 8), making evaluation difficult.
 SS uses discrete data, i.e., individual pixels at
specific scales, to represent what is essentially a
continuous process, i.e., an object’s persistence
through a range of scales. Thus, SS events,
conceptualized as points in space, are actually
modeled as single blobs. This means that a
decision has to be made whether a blob is a
member of the SS-blob below it, above it, or if it is
a new blob. This in turn affects the 4D-volumetric
measure and ultimately the ranking of significant
2D-blobs. Consequently, this is not a trivial
problem to solve, though ‘work-a-rounds’ exist
(Hay et al., 2002b).
One of the greatest limitations of the MOSA is that
it has not yet been tested over a large number of
different landscapes, or by a significant number of
researchers. However, further testing and validation
are underway. In addition, no commercial software is

Fig. 8. Vectorized ranked blobs. Note how polygons overlay each
other making analysis nontrivial (cf. with Fig. 1a).

G.J. Hay et al. / ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry & Remote Sensing 57 (2003) 327–345

available and like FNEA, its object modeling is done
empirically. Thus, the results of multiscale analysis
require validation against field data, which becomes
difficult if not impossible as scales become coarser.
The addition of MCS to the iterative OSA/OSU
framework allows for automatically segmented
image-objects, but there is no presented topological
solution for hierarchically linking them through scale.
4.3. Strategies for improving results in FNEA, SS and
OSA/OSU
As discussed in the preceding section, each of the
three techniques, while novel and powerful in the area
of remote sensing, also exhibit limitations that make
them less than ideal for the automatic detection,
extraction, and hierarchical linking of ecologically
meaningful multiscale image-objects within remotely
sensed data. In this section, we describe a number of
strategies that draw upon the strengths of each individual method and discuss how they may be applied
to enhance the capabilities of the other respective
techniques.
FNEA requires that a user possesses a priori
information regarding the scene. To overcome this
limitation, particularly when conducting baseline
mapping, where no ‘ground-truth’ data are available,
we hypothesize that the scale of expression and
location of significant scale-space blobs may be used
as early visual operators to automatically define and
or refine the aggregation semantics of the FNEA.
Unfortunately, based on preliminary results (Blaschke
and Hay, 2001), it does not appear possible to incorporate SS-results for the a priori determination of the
most relevant FNEA segmentation levels, because SSblobs cannot be associated to a single level of segmentation. However, it may be possible to combine
both approaches during the classification and/or interpretation processes, respectively. Because FNEA produces several levels of objects and the classification
process utilizes this multi-level information explicitly,
the analyst has to determine how many levels will be
incorporated for a certain class definition. In this case,
the SS rank-id and the domain/lifetime attributes
provide important and potentially useful information.
In a SS-cube, a significant amount of redundant
data results in large stack sizes, which in our research
range from 200 to 980 MB each. To reduce the

341

memory requirements when defining SS-blob topology, we have integrated a three-tier approach drawn
from Hierarchy theory with the capability of IDL to
‘parallel-process’ multidimensional array structures
(Hay et al., 2002b). Thus, instead of loading the entire
stack into memory, we only need to load three scales
of a SS-cube into memory at a time. From a Hierarchy
theory perspective, we evaluate the blob locations at
the ‘focal’ scale and establish links with blobs in the
scale above and with those in the scale below. We then
shift up an additional scale in the cube, while dropping the bottom scale, always keeping only three
scales in memory at once. We then repeat this procedure until the last scale has been processed.
To overcome evaluation problems resulting from
the large number of ranked SS blobs that visually
obscure each other when overlaid on the study area,
we suggest that SS-events represent critical thresholds within a hyper-blob, where fundamentally different geometric structures exist both in scale and the
landscape. Thus, from an ecological perspective, the
lifetime of a SS-blob may be considered as levels
within a specific scale-domain. To define this
domain, each hyper-blob is topologically registered
as a unique entity and its corresponding SS-events
are isolated. That is, the first SS-event of each hyperblob is geometrically defined regardless of where and
what scale they exist within the stack, i.e., x, y, t.
Then the second, third and nth-events of each hyperblob are isolated until the last possible event is
defined. These event values are then considered as
‘scale domain attributes’ and are assigned to their
corresponding ranked blobs. This domain attribute
provides a unique way to query, partition and evaluate the resulting multiscale ‘domain’ surface structures, as many blobs can and do exist within a single
domain, but no more than one blob can exist within
the same ‘x, y, z domain’ space. Thus, the overlapping/obscuring problem is resolved and it allows
us to evaluate the resulting multiscale surface structures in terms of critical scale-specific thresholds. In
addition, by integrating these hierarchical concepts
with geostatistics and 3D visualization techniques,
domains can be visually modeled as ‘scale-domain
manifolds’ (Hay et al., 2002b), which we suggest
correspond to the ‘scaling ladder’ as described by Wu
(1999) in his outline of the Hierarchical Patch
Dynamics Paradigm.

342

G.J. Hay et al. / ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry & Remote Sensing 57 (2003) 327–345

Experience and knowledge gained from SS related
to the importance of Gaussian filters and the axioms
they satisfy as an uncommitted vision system have
also been applied to OSA/OSU. In particular, to
reduce the diagonal bias introduced by the square
kernel originally used in OSA, we have incorporated
the use of a round filter similar to that used in SS.
Though not truly Gaussian, it is a pixelated approximation of a round kernel5 that results in a more
isotropic filter. To implement this change, the variance
threshold heuristics have been modified and tested
accordingly. The most important result of this implementation is that when analysis is conducted over
large window sizes, diagonal artifacts (due to a square
kernel) are significantly visually reduced within the
image. Furthermore, to increase computational efficiency when using this filter, a ‘bank’ of varying sized
round filters could be generated once and called as
needed; and convolution in the Fourier domain (as
done for SS processing) can be used to reduce the
need to apply a moving window routine.
To provide a topological solution for hierarchically
linking image-objects through scale, the topological
tools developed to assess multiscale SS-blob structure
can be used to establish hierarchical links with individual image-objects through all MCS data sets.
Consequently, each watershed-object and its associated spatial attributes can be explicitly modeled and
analyzed within a GIS and/or used as an additional
logic channel for improved land-cover classification
results. Thus, the ability exists to create a true objectoriented topology like FNEA, but with a number of
the SS advantages inherent to an uncommitted framework. In addition, no user interaction is required and
the system and its results are fully decomposable, i.e.,
tractable, through scale.

5. Conclusions
Complex systems are hierarchically structured,
scale dependent and composed of many interacting
components. These components are of two fundamen-

5

The method used is that of Michener’s, modified to take into
account the fact that IDL plots arrays faster than single points. See
Foley and van Dam (1982, p. 445) for the algorithm.

tal types: integrated objects and aggregate objects.
From a remote sensing perspective, image-objects are
integrated objects that exhibit an intrinsic scale and
are composed of structurally connected parts, i.e., Hres pixels. In this paper, we hypothesize that multiscale analysis should be guided by the intrinsic scale
of the image-objects composing the scene. Thus,
image-objects should play a key role in the multiscale
analysis, exploration and hierarchical linking of
remote sensing data. As a basis for this, we describe
and compare the limitations, strengths and results of
three technically and theoretically different multiscale
approaches, each with a common theme: their focus
on intrinsic pattern and their multiscale exploration of
image-objects within a single image.
FNEA automatically isolates image-objects of different sizes and shape dependent upon scales predetermined by the analyst. The resulting image-objects
correspond strongly to differently sized landscape
components as an experienced image interpreter would
delineate them. However, a significant amount of exploratory work is required to define appropriate segmentation levels, and a unique segmentation solution
is not fully operational and transferable to another
image without major corrections.
Linear SS is an uncommitted vision framework;
thus, it requires very little user interaction, or a priori
scene information. However, a range of scales and
their scale increment must be defined to generate a
multiscale representation. Unlike FNEA, SS combined with blob-feature detection does not provide
explicit object delineation, but rather provides a more
generalized representation that can support or guide
later stage visual processing.
MOSA represents a hierarchical framework by
which the spatially dominant components of an image
will emerge at coarser scales because analysis and
segmentation are specific to the differently sized,
shaped, and spatially distributed image-objects that
compose the scene. These image-objects are visually
meaningful, hierarchically tractable, reduce the effects
of MAUP and require no a priori scene information
for image-object delineation to occur. MOSA also
provides an object-specific mechanism for upscaling,
though we note that this framework is relatively recent
and requires further evaluation.
Because each of the described techniques have
evolved beyond individual pixel analysis to analyzing

G.J. Hay et al. / ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry & Remote Sensing 57 (2003) 327–345

the explicit contextual structure of image-objects, they
have significant potential for ecological applications,
for example:









At fine scales, each technique could be used for
individual tree crown, forest-object and landscape
patch recognition, though we note that only SS and
MOSA offer an ‘unsupervised’ approach for object
delineation. In addition, FNEA output can be used
to improve land-use classifications and MOSA
output can automatically be generated to improve
land-cover classifications.
The explicit delineation of image-objects defined
by FNEA can be used for baseline mapping and/or
for updating existing geo-information. Additionally, FNEA has the ability to differentiate different
‘object-classes’ within the same image ‘on-demand’ for different applications. This could be
especially useful for defining different habitat maps
within the same scene based upon different habitat
scale requirements.
Animation of binary blobs within a stack could be
used to visually assess fragmentation and connectivity of dominant forest ecosystem components
through scale.
Blob-events could be used to find critical scaledependent landscape thresholds.
Within the MOSA framework, individual ecosystem components (i.e., trees, vegetation components, etc.) and edge effects become real objects
that evolve and are measurable through scale. This
could have important implications in reserve and
habitat planning. Model development and data type
selection could also be guided by SS and MOSA
scale-domains and landscape threshold patterns.

In this work, we examine the potential of three
multiscale methodologies for the modeling of landscape structure in H-res imagery and have provided a
comparison of each approach. While the methodological comparison is technically interesting, the overall
goal of this study is to contribute to a more coherent
understanding of landscape structures, their representation in remote sensing images, and mechanisms for
their linking through scale. The authors independently
started from paradigms that most remote sensing and
GIS methodologies do not readily support: Geographic entities are represented at a variety of scales

343

and levels of abstraction, within a single image. All
three approaches incorporate a bottom-up approach
designed to convert lower level observational data
into higher level geographic entities. Thus, armed
with a visual perspective of the patterns generated at
different scales, and methods to decompose them into
their constituent multiscale image-objects, we suggest
that the ability to understand the processes behind
multiscale landscape patterns is significantly enhanced.

Acknowledgements
This work has been supported by a team grant from
FCAR, Gouvernement du Québec, awarded to Dr.
André Bouchard and Dr. Danielle Marceau and by a
series of scholarships awarded to Dr. Geoffrey Hay
which include a Marc Bourgie Foundation PhD
Award of Excellence, a Biology graduate scholarship
of excellence from the University of Montréal, and a
GREFi PhD scholarship (Groupe de recherche en
écologie forestière interuniversitaire). Dr. Thomas
Blaschke is thankful to Definiens Imaging, Munich,
Germany for close cooperation with the University of
Salzburg. We also thank Mr. Patrick Dubé for his
assistance with scale-space coding and express our
appreciation to three anonymous referees for their
constructive comments.

References
Allen, T.F.H., Starr, T.B., 1982. Hierarchy Perspective for Ecological Complexity. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
310 pp.
Baatz, M., Schäpe, A., 2000. Multiresolution segmentation: an
optimization approach for high quality multiscale image segmentation. In: Strobl, J., Blaschke, T. (Eds.), Angewandte
Geogr. Informationsverarbeitung, vol. XII. Wichmann, Heidelberg, pp. 12 – 23.
Beucher, S., Lantuéjoul, C., 1979. Use of watersheds in contour
detection. Int. Workshop on Image Processing, Real-time Edge
and Motion Detection/Estimation, Rennes, France, 17 – 21 September. CCETT/IRISA (Centre commun d’études de télédiffusion et télécommunications /Institut de recherche en informatique
et systèmes aléatoires). Report No. 132, 2.1 – 2.12.
Biederman, I., 1987. Recognition-by-components: a theory of human
image understanding. Psychological Review 94 (2), 115 – 147.
Blaschke, T., Hay, G.J., 2001. Object-oriented image analysis and

344

G.J. Hay et al. / ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry & Remote Sensing 57 (2003) 327–345

scale-space: theory and methods for modeling and evaluating
multiscale landscape structure. International Archives of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 34 (Part 4/W5), 22 – 29.
Blaschke, T., Strobl, J., 2001. What’s wrong with pixels? Some
recent developments interfacing remote sensing and GIS. GISZeitschrift für Geoinformationssysteme (6), 12 – 17.
Blaschke, T., Lang, S., Lorup, E., Strobl, J., Zeil, P., 2000. Objectoriented image processing in an integrated GIS/remote sensing
environment and perspectives for environmental applications.
In: Cremers, A., Greve, K. (Eds.), Environmental Information
for Planning, Politics and the Public, vol. 2. Metropolis Verlag,
Marburg, pp. 555 – 570.
Blaschke, T., Conradi, M., Lang, S., 2001. Multi-scale image analysis for ecological monitoring of heterogeneous, small structured landscapes. Proceedings of SPIE 4545, 35 – 44.
Bobick, A., Bolles, R., 1992. The representation space paradigm
of concurrent evolving object descriptions. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 14 (2),
146 – 156.
Canny, J., 1986. A computational approach to edge detection. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 8
(6), 679 – 697.
Chaudhuri, B., Sarkar, N., 1995. Texture segmentation using fractal
dimension. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence 17 (1), 72 – 77.
Definiens, 2002. www.definiens-imaging.com. Accessed October
30, 2002.
Foley, J.D., van Dam, A., 1982. Fundamentals of Interactive Computer Graphics. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA. 664 pp.
Foody, G., 1999. Image classification with a neural network: from
completely-crisp to fully-fuzzy situations. In: Atkinson, P.M.,
Tate, N.J. (Eds.), Advances in Remote Sensing and GIS Analysis. Wiley, Chichester, pp. 17 – 37.
Forman, R.T.T., 1995. Land Mosaics: The Ecology of Landscapes
and Regions. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge. 632 pp.
Fotheringham, A.S., Wong, D.W.S., 1991. The modifiable areal
unit problem in multivariate statistical analysis. Environment
and Planning A 23, 1025 – 1044.
Haralick, R.M., Sternberg, S.R., Zhuang, X., 1987. Image analysis
using mathematical morphology. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence 9 (4), 532 – 550.
Hay, G.J., Marceau, D.J., 1998. Are image-objects the key for
upscaling remotely sensed data? Proceedings of Modelling of
Complex Systems, July 12 – 17, New Orleans, USA, pp. 88 – 92.
Hay, G.J., Niemann, K.O., 1994. Visualizing 3-D texture: a threedimensional structural approach to model forest texture. Canadian Journal of Remote Sensing 20 (2), 90 – 101.
Hay, G.J., Niemann, K.O., McLean, G., 1996. An object-specific
image-texture analysis of H-resolution forest imagery. Remote
Sensing of Environment 55 (2), 108 – 122.
Hay, G.J., Niemann, K.O., Goodenough, D.G., 1997. Spatial
thresholds, image-objects and upscaling: a multi-scale evaluation. Remote Sensing of Environment 62 (1), 1 – 19.
Hay, G.J., Marceau, D.J., Dubé, P., Bouchard, A., 2001. A multiscale framework for landscape analysis: object-specific analysis
and upscaling. Landscape Ecology 16 (6), 471 – 490.
Hay, G.J., Dubé, P., Bouchard, A., Marceau, D.J., 2002a. A scale-

space primer for exploring and quantifying complex landscapes.
Ecological Modelling 153 (1 – 2), 27 – 49.
Hay, G.J., Marceau, D.J., Bouchard, A., 2002b. Modelling multiscale landscape structure within a hierarchical scale-space
framework. International Archives of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 34 (Part 4), 532 – 536.
IDL (Interactive Data Language), 2002. www.rsinc.com. Accessed
October 30, 2002.
Jähne, B., 1999. A multiresolution signal representation. In: Jähne,
B., Haußecker, H., Geißler, P. (Eds.), Handbook on Computer Vision and Applications. Academic Press, Boston, USA,
pp. 67 – 90.
Koenderink, J.J., 1984. The structure of images. Biological Cybernetics 50 (5), 363 – 370.
Levin, S.A., 1999. Fragile Dominions: Complexity and the Commons. Perseus Books, Reading. 250 pp.
Lindeberg, T., 1994. Scale-Space Theory in Computer Vision.
Kluwer Academic Publishing, Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
423 pp.
Marceau, D.J., 1999. The scale issue in the social and natural sciences. Canadian Journal of Remote Sensing 25 (4), 347 – 356.
Marceau, D.J., Hay, G.J., 1999. Contributions of remote sensing to
the scale issues. Canadian Journal of Remote Sensing 25 (4),
357 – 366.
Marceau, D.J., Howarth, P.J., Gratton, D.J., 1994. Remote sensing
and the measurement of geographical entities in a forested environment: Part 1. The scale and spatial aggregation problem.
Remote Sensing of Environment 49 (2), 93 – 104.
Meyer, F., Beucher, S., 1990. Morphological segmentation. Journal of Visual Communication and Image Representation 1 (1),
21 – 46.
O’Neill, R.V., King, A.W., 1997. Homage to St. Michael; or, why
are there so many books on scale? In: Peterson, D.L., Parker,
V.T. (Eds.), Ecological Scale Theory and Applications. (Complexity in Ecological Systems Series). Columbia Univ. Press,
New York, NY, pp. 3 – 15.
Openshaw, S., 1981. The modifiable areal unit problem. In: Wrigley, N., Bennett, R.J. (Eds.), Quantitative Geography: A British
View. Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, pp. 60 – 69.
Openshaw, S., 1984. The modifiable areal unit problem. Concepts
and Techniques in Modern Geography (CATMOG), vol. 38.
Geo Books, Norwich. 40 pp.
Openshaw, S., Taylor, P., 1979. A million or so correlation coefficients: three experiments on the modifiable areal unit problem.
In: Wrigley, N. (Ed.), Statistical Applications in the Spatial
Sciences. Pion, London, pp. 127 – 144.
Robert, C.P., 2001. The Bayesian Choice: From Decision-Theoretic
Foundations to Computational Implementation. Springer Verlag,
New York. 624 pp.
Rowe, J.S., 1961. The level-of-integration concept and ecology.
Ecology 42 (2), 420 – 427.
Salari, E., Ling, Z., 1995. Texture segmentation using hierarchical wavelet decomposition. Pattern Recognition 28 (12),
1819 – 1824.
Schiewe, J., Tufte, L., Ehlers, M., 2001. Potential and problems of
multiscale segmentation methods in remote sensing. GIS-Zeitschrift für Geoinformationssysteme (6), 34 – 39.

G.J. Hay et al. / ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry & Remote Sensing 57 (2003) 327–345
Settle, J.J., Drake, N.A., 1993. Linear mixing and the estimation of
ground cover proportions. International Journal of Remote Sensing 14 (6), 1159 – 1177.
Simon, H.A., 1962. The architecture of complexity. Proceedings of
the American Philosophical Society 106, 467 – 482.
Skidmore, A., 1999. The role of remote sensing in natural resource
management. International Archives of Photogrammetry and
Remote Sensing 32 (Part 7C2), 5 – 11.
ter Haar Romeny, B.M., Florack, L.M.J., 2000. Front-end vision, a multiscale geometry engine. Proc. First IEEE International Workshop on Biologically Motivated Computer Vision
(BMCV2000), May 15 – 17, Seoul, Korea. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, vol. 1811. Springer Verlag, Heidelberg,
pp. 297 – 307.
Tobler, W., 1970. A computer movie simulating urban growth in the
Detroit region. Economic Geography 46 (2), 234 – 240.
Wang, F., 1990. Improving remote sensing image analysis through
fuzzy information representation. Photogrammetric Engineering
and Remote Sensing 56 (8), 1163 – 1169.

345

Weickert, J., Ishikawa, S., Imiya, A., 1997. On the history of
Gaussian scale-space axiomatics. In: Sporring, J., Nielsen, M.,
Florack, L., Johansen, P. (Eds.), Gaussian Scale-Space Theory.
Kluwer Academic Publishing, Dordrecht, The Netherlands,
pp. 45 – 59.
Wessman, C.A., 1992. Spatial scales and global change: bridging
the gap from plots to GCM grid cells. Annual Review of Ecological Systems 23, 175 – 200.
Wiens, J.A., 1989. Spatial scaling in ecology. Functional Ecology 3
(4), 385 – 397.
Woodcock, C.E., Strahler, A.H., 1987. The factor of scale in remote
sensing. Remote Sensing of Environment 21 (3), 311 – 332.
Wu, J., 1999. Hierarchy and scaling: extrapolating information
along a scaling ladder. Canadian Journal of Remote Sensing
25 (4), 367 – 380.
Wu, J., Marceau, D., 2002. Modelling complex ecological systems:
an introduction. Ecological Modelling 153 (1 – 2), 1 – 6.

