Journal of Applied Ecology 2011, 48, 758–767

doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2664.2011.01993.x

REVIEW

Acoustic monitoring in terrestrial environments using
microphone arrays: applications, technological
considerations and prospectus
Daniel T. Blumstein1*, Daniel J. Mennill2, Patrick Clemins3, Lewis Girod4, Kung Yao5,
Gail Patricelli6, Jill L. Deppe7, Alan H. Krakauer6, Christopher Clark8,
Kathryn A. Cortopassi8, Sean F. Hanser9, Brenda McCowan9,10, Andreas M. Ali5
and Alexander N. G. Kirschel1,11,12
1

Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California, 621 Young Drive South, Los Angeles, CA
90095-1606, USA; 2Department of Biological Sciences, University of Windsor, 401 Sunset Avenue, Windsor, Ontario
N9B3P4, Canada; 3AAAS, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005, USA; 4Computer Science and
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 32 Vassar Street, Cambridge, MA 02139,
USA; 5Electrical Engineering Department, University of California, 420 Westwood Plaza, Los Angeles, CA 900951594, USA; 6Department of Evolution and Ecology, University of California, One Shields Avenue, Davis, CA 95616,
USA; 7Illinois Natural History Survey, Institute of Natural Resource Sustainability, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, 1816 South Oak Street, Champaign, IL 61820, USA; 8Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology, Cornell
University, 159 Sapsucker Woods Road, Ithaca, NY 14850, USA; 9Department of Population Health and
Reproduction, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California, 1 Shields Avenue, Davis, CA 95616, USA;
10
California National Primate Research Center, University of California, 1 Shields Avenue, Davis, CA 95616, USA;
11
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Cyprus, Nicosia 1678, Cyprus and 12Edward Grey Institute,
Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PS, U.K.

Summary
1. Animals produce sounds for diverse biological functions such as defending territories, attracting
mates, deterring predators, navigation, ﬁnding food and maintaining contact with members of their
social group. Biologists can take advantage of these acoustic behaviours to gain valuable insights
into the spatial and temporal scales over which individuals and populations interact. Advances in
bioacoustic technology, including the development of autonomous cabled and wireless recording
arrays, permit data collection at multiple locations over time. These systems are transforming the
way we study individuals and populations of animals and are leading to signiﬁcant advances in our
understandings of the complex interactions between animals and their habitats.
2. Here, we review questions that can be addressed using bioacoustic approaches, by providing a
primer on technologies and approaches used to study animals at multiple organizational levels by
ecologists, behaviourists and conservation biologists.
3. Spatially dispersed groups of microphones (arrays) enable users to study signal directionality on
a small scale or to locate animals and track their movements on a larger scale.
4. Advances in algorithm development can allow users to discriminate among species, sexes, age
groups and individuals.
5. With such technology, users can remotely and non-invasively survey populations, describe the
soundscape, quantify anthropogenic noise, study species interactions, gain new insights into the
social dynamics of sound-producing animals and track the eﬀects of factors such as climate change
and habitat fragmentation on phenology and biodiversity.
6. There remain many challenges in the use of acoustic monitoring, including the diﬃculties in performing signal recognition across taxa. The bioacoustics community should focus on developing a

*Correspondence author. E-mail: marmots@ucla.edu
 2011 The Authors. Journal of Applied Ecology  2011 British Ecological Society

Acoustic monitoring 759

common framework for signal recognition that allows for various species’ data to be analysed by
any recognition system supporting a set of common standards.
7. Synthesis and applications. Microphone arrays are increasingly used to remotely monitor acoustically active animals. We provide examples from a variety of taxa where acoustic arrays have been
used for ecological, behavioural and conservation studies. We discuss the technologies used, the
methodologies for automating signal recognition and some of the remaining challenges. We also
make recommendations for using this technology to aid in wildlife management.
Key-words: anthropogenic noise, bioacoustics, biodiversity monitoring, non-invasive sampling, sensor networks

Introduction
Ecologists and behavioural biologists have collaborated with
engineers, computer scientists and linguists to design and
deploy instruments to remotely record sounds emitted by
animals (Table S1, Supporting Information). These collaborative eﬀorts have produced exciting new technologies that
allow researchers to detect, recognize, localize and track
acoustically active animals (Glossary of terms Table 1).
Results from these studies are leading to new insights into
the adaptations and specialized features of animal acoustic
signals (e.g. signal directionality, transmission properties);
the processes of communication within complex social
groups (e.g. eavesdropping, communication networks); the
seasonal variability in animal acoustic behaviours and how
those relate to ecological factors (phenology); and the spatiotemporal variability of the acoustic habitats in which animals
live (e.g. ambient noise, anthropogenic sounds). New monitoring techniques allow researchers to survey at ecologically
meaningful scales, over areas that contain populations of
animals and time periods that contain signiﬁcant biological
activities such as mating, migration and foraging. Here, we
provide a brief review and introduction to the literature of

the questions that have been addressed using bioacoustic
monitoring technologies in terrestrial ecosystems.
We have written this article for applied ecologists and conservation biologists, and behavioural ecologists who may beneﬁt from using these technologies. One goal is to enable
ﬁeld ecologists to have meaningful conversations with
bioacousticians and engineers who may be able to help them
solve management problems. A second goal is to share the
research needs of ecologists with bioacousticians. We also
include a preview of the types of questions that could be asked
in the future, and a primer on the technology and algorithms
that have been and are being developed to study bioacoustic
biodiversity and behaviour.

Acoustic monitoring in the ﬁeld
SPECIES DISTRIBUTIONS, ABUNDANCES AND
BIODIVERSITY

For animals that produce sound acoustic recordings are an eﬃcient way to sample populations and communities to derive
reliable estimates of species occurrence and, potentially, to estimate abundance. Single-microphone recording units have been

Table 1. Glossary of terms
Anthropogenic sounds

Human-generated sounds produced as a by-product of a human activity (e.g. automobile, aircraft,
jackhammer) or intentionally (e.g. siren, fog horn)

Classiﬁcation

The process of determining the identity of a sound event (e.g. species, individual, sex, age)

Communication network

The set of signallers and receivers engaged in the exchange of information. Animal communication
traditionally focused on interactions between single signaller–receiver pairs but has grown to recognize
that animal communication often consists of networks of multiple signallers and receivers (McGregor
2005)

Directionality

The two- or three-dimensional spatial variation in signal amplitude as it radiates from a signaller

Nodes

The location where one or more sensors is deployed and operating

Localize

The process of determining the two- or three-dimensional position of the source of an acoustic event

Microphone array

A multi-sensor system designed to spatially and synchronously sample the sound ﬁeld.

Phenology

The timing of seasonal events; for example, when an animal migration occurs, when animals start
defending territories, or when a population of animals begins or ends its mating season

Soundscape

The complete acoustic environment consisting of biotic and abiotic sounds, where biotic sounds refer
to those produced by living animals, including humans, while abiotic sounds encompass all natural
physical sounds (e.g. water, wind, rain) and non-natural mechanical noise produced by humans

Track

The process of linking a time series of acoustic locations through space

 2011 The Authors. Journal of Applied Ecology  2011 British Ecological Society, Journal of Applied Ecology, 48, 758–767

760 D. T. Blumstein et al.
used to measure species richness and composition of birds
(e.g. Haselmayer & Quinn 2000), bats (e.g. MacSwiney et al.
2008; Obrist, Boesch & Flückeger 2008), anurans (e.g. Courch
& Paton 2002) and insects (e.g. Brandes 2005). Stereo-microphones (e.g. Hobson et al. 2002) and quadraphonic microphone arrays (e.g. Celis-Murillo, Deppe & Allen 2009) have
been used to estimate bird species abundances in addition to
richness and community composition. Such systems capitalize
on time delays and intensity diﬀerences between simultaneously recording microphones to provide information on the
relative position of sound sources, enabling multiple individuals to be distinguished from one another. Celis-Murillo, Deppe
& Allen (2009) demonstrated that acoustic recordings can perform even better than skilled observers at sampling bird communities via audio-visual ﬁeld-based point counts. With an
array of three or more spatially dispersed microphones
(Fig. 1), localization algorithms can be used to determine the
absolute geographic position of a sound source. Collier,
Kirschel & Taylor (2010) used a 32-microphone wireless array
arranged in eight nodes to localise Mexican antthrush Formicarius moniliger in the dense undergrowth of a Neotropical
rainforest with mean errors <50 cm, and these localizations
helped to develop territory maps to monitor spatial and temporal dynamics of marked individuals (Kirschel et al. 2011).
Thus, larger arrays have the potential to provide detailed data
on territory dynamics, population densities and habitat use at
the level of the population, group or known individual.
Acoustic recordings can be used by conservation biologists.
Researchers have deployed microphone systems to detect the
presence of endangered or rare species. For instance, multiple

research teams have used single-microphone recording units
to investigate whether or not ivory-billed woodpeckers
Campephilus principalis persist in the bottomland forests of
Arkansas and the Florida panhandle (Fitzpatrick et al. 2005;
Hill et al. 2006; Swiston & Mennill 2009). Thought to be
extinct since the 1940s, acoustic analyses of >40 000 h of
audio recordings provided evidence that woodpeckers may
persist in remote forests that are diﬃcult to monitor with conventional technology. In addition, passive acoustic arrays are
being used to study the behaviour and population structure of
threatened African elephant Loxodonta africana populations
in habitats where visual survey methods are largely impractical
(Payne, Thompson & Kramer 2003). Because they can provide
reliable data on species richness and composition more rapidly
than human-based survey techniques (Parker 1991), acoustic
monitoring approaches oﬀer an eﬃcient and eﬀective method
for assessing biodiversity (Riede 1993, 1998) and examining
long-term changes related to seasonal variation, human activity, habitat modiﬁcation and climate change.
Acoustic surveys also provide insight into habitat quality
and ecosystem health. Fischer et al. (1997) used acoustic sampling to estimate the density and composition of orthopteran
species in Bavarian dry grasslands. They demonstrated that
the density ratio of two groups (euryoecious to xerophilic
grasshoppers) was a suitable indicator of eutrophication
and potential threat to dry grasslands. National Parks such as
Denali National Park and Preserve are using automated
recordings to inventory and monitor park soundscapes to
identify sound sources and develop management plans to mitigate the impacts of anthropogenic noise on ecological function
and visitor experience (Hults & Burson 2006; Miller 2008).

PHENOLOGY AND TEMPORAL RESPONSES TO
DISTURBANCE

Fig. 1. An example of a microphone array localizing a vocalizing bat.
Here, a 20-channel array is arranged into 5 nodes of 4 microphones,
with diﬀerently sized microphones on each node to allow for localization in 3 dimensions. Dashed lines represent the distance the sound
needs to travel to reach each microphone, and cross-correlation of
signals recorded can aid in determining the location of the sound
source.

Standardized acoustic monitoring provides a powerful tool for
measuring shifts in phenology and quantifying temporal
dynamics in individual behaviour, populations and community structure. Hüppop et al. (2006) and Farnsworth & Russell
(2007) used acoustic sampling to identify migratory bird species and describe patterns in the nocturnal migration activity;
such data are nearly impossible to collect without acoustic
sampling because of the ineﬀectiveness of visual survey methods at night. Long-term, single- and multi-channel recording
technology has also been used to monitor seasonal changes in
acoustic behaviour in a variety of animals, including pileated
woodpeckers Dryocopus pileatus (Tremain, Swiston & Mennill
2008) and barred owls Strix varia (Odom & Mennill 2010). By
describing the relationship between migration activity derived
from acoustic data and weather conditions, Hüppop et al.
(2006) were able to assess the potential eﬀects of wind farms on
European migratory bird populations. Márquez et al. (2008)
used automated acoustic recordings to study the reproductive
phenology of anurans across multiple sites in relation to temperature and humidity to gain insight into the impacts of climate change on anuran populations in Spain. Acoustic
monitoring enables the collection of important biological data

 2011 The Authors. Journal of Applied Ecology  2011 British Ecological Society, Journal of Applied Ecology, 48, 758–767

Acoustic monitoring 761
over long time periods and across large areas, allowing conservation management decisions to be made by identifying which
part of a habitat is used temporally and spatially by acoustically active species.

EFFECTS OF ANTHROPOGENIC NOISE ON ANIMALS

Acoustic monitoring assists studies examining the impacts of
anthropogenic noise on individual animals and populations.
For instance, Delaney et al. (1999) employed acoustic recordings and video surveillance to show that noise from approaching helicopters during military training exercises and chain saw
noise caused Mexican spotted owls Strix occidentalis lucida to
ﬂush from their nests. Birds did not ﬂush when noise stimuli
were >105 m away from the nest, suggesting that a 105-m buffer zone around nests could minimize potential eﬀects on nesting. Analyses of acoustic recordings in urban and rural
environments throughout Europe have demonstrated that animals alter signal frequency to avoid masking by traﬃc noise
(Slabbekoorn & den Boer-Visser 2006) but also suﬀer reduced
reproductive success in noisy areas (Halfwerk et al. 2011).
Recording technology thus allows for the quantiﬁcation of
impacts of anthropogenic sound on auditory behaviour, but
more importantly from a management perspective, on the
resulting abundances and distributions of wild animals.

SIGNAL STRUCTURE, DIRECTIONALITY AND
PROPAGATION PATTERNS

The use of microphone arrays in the ﬁeld has great potential
for relating small- and large-scale variation in the spatial
structure of signals to the social and environmental context
in which the signals are used (e.g. Forrest 1991; Lammers &
Au 2003). Dantzker, Deane & Bradbury (1999) and Patricelli, Dantzker & Bradbury (2007, 2008) used 8-microphone
arrays to surround vocalizing individuals of greater sagegrouse Centrocercus urophasianus, and red-winged blackbirds
Agelaius phoeniceus respectively, to make detailed measurements of the directionality and amplitude of vocalizations in
the ﬁeld. Analysis revealed that sage-grouse signal up to
24 dB louder laterally than directly in front of the bird.
Males direct these lateral beams towards females during
courtship, suggesting that acoustic directionality may have
inﬂuenced the evolution of behavioural displays, or vice versa
(Dantzker & Bradbury 2006). Blackbirds use more directional vocalizations in social contexts where eavesdropping
may be costly (Dabelsteen 2005), such as pre-copulatory
calls, and less directional vocalizations when broadcasting
alarm calls to neighbours and mates. A study using an
8-channel array for acoustic ﬂight path tracking of whiskered
bats Myotis mystacinus has shown that call structure is
manipulated by the bats to maximise echolocation and
reduce collision risk (Holderied, Jones & von Helverson
2006; Jones & Holderied 2007). Acoustic arrays can thus aid
in the understanding of directionality and adaptive structure
of signals, and the contexts in which those are propagated by
communicating animals.

In addition, Patricelli and colleagues have measured the
transmission loss and source amplitude of vocal displays
using calibrated microphones and playbacks at male calling
sites, while using a 24-microphone array to monitor greater
sage-grouse leks (Patricelli & Krakauer 2010). Understanding
these characteristics of acoustic behaviour in sage-grouse can
be important from a conservation perspective, as these signals
have evolved in complex mating rituals (Gibson, Bradbury &
Vehrencamp 1991), which might be inﬂuenced by increasing
disturbance, and conservation managers can determine
the critical distance between lek sites and areas of such disturbance.

COMMUNICATION AND SOCIAL NETWORKS

Larger arrays have been used to study signalling interactions
between pairs of individuals as well as in neighbourhoods of
individuals. Recording with an 8-microphone wired array in
the humid forests of Costa Rica, Mennill and colleagues have
explored the ecological and evolutionary signiﬁcance of vocal
duets in rufous-and-white wrens Thryothorus rufalbus (Mennill
et al. 2006; Mennill & Vehrencamp 2008). In many tropical
animals, males and females sing coordinated vocalizations,
and yet their function remains elusive because many species
live in dense vegetation where visual tracking is diﬃcult.
Acoustic localization using microphone arrays has provided
the ﬁrst rigorous data on the relative position of males
and females, as they perform duets in dense tropical forests
(Mennill & Vehrencamp 2008).
Using a 16-microphone array, researchers have simultaneously recorded entire breeding neighbourhoods of blackcapped chickadees Poecile atricapillus in Ontario, Canada
(Fitzsimmons et al. 2008a,b; Foote et al. 2008a,b; Lippold
et al. 2008). In winter, this species lives in ﬂocks with linear
dominance hierarchies, and in summer, males defend individual breeding territories against former ﬂock-mates and lessfamiliar males. Arrays allowed researchers to study interactions that produced empirical support for the communication
network model (McGregor 2005), suggesting that territorial
males broadcast signals that contain aggressive and repulsive
information for rival males, but attractive information for
prospecting females.
African elephants Loxodonta africana have been studied
with multi-microphone arrays (Payne, Thompson & Kramer
2003; Thompson, Payne & Schwager 2009). Autonomous
recording units placed around an entire forest clearing
allowed researchers to localize vocalizing animals and to precisely correlate observed behaviour with vocalizations.
Researchers used collars ﬁtted with microphones and radiotransmitters combined with video monitoring to study African elephant vocalizations in relation to social and
reproductive context in a captive population (Soltis, Leong &
Savage 2005a,b; Leong et al. 2003) and found that females’
rumble vocalizations were produced in response to those
made by other individuals, especially aﬃliated females, in a
wide range of social contexts. Microphone arrays have
also been used to determine the location of alarm calling yel-

 2011 The Authors. Journal of Applied Ecology  2011 British Ecological Society, Journal of Applied Ecology, 48, 758–767

762 D. T. Blumstein et al.
low-bellied marmots Marmota ﬂaviventris, demonstrating that
alarm calls are mostly given by individuals close to burrows,
in relative safety from predators (Collier et al. 2010).
Acoustic arrays thus allow us to better understand social
interactions and networks in animals. This knowledge can then
be applied towards wildlife management, because it highlights
of the importance of group size and structure; evolved
traits that have important ﬁtness consequences (Blumstein &
Fernández-Juricic 2010).

Recording equipment and technical
considerations
When selecting recording equipment, researchers must clearly
identify the study objectives, the target organism(s) and the
environmental conditions under which the study will be conducted must be clearly deﬁned. Because technology evolves
rapidly, we will not recommend speciﬁc technologies. Rather,
we will discuss various factors that must be considered to select
suitable hardware for each component of a recording system.
Additional considerations are discussed in Appendix S1 (Supporting Information).

MICROPHONES AND RECORDING UNITS

The type of microphone or sensor required will be driven largely by the kinds of animals being studied because recording
equipment is sensitive to a limited range of frequencies. The
organism (infrasonic animals, e.g. some mammals, birds; ultrasonic animals such as some bats, etc.) under study or the parts
of the soundscape to be monitored will determine the frequency response and type of microphone needed to adequately
capture all of the sounds of interest, because diﬀerent types of
sound in the environment (e.g. biotic sounds, natural physical
noises and mechanical noises) are characterized by diﬀerent
frequency ranges.
Directional microphones may be preferred if single sensors
are meant to capture acoustic information from speciﬁc orientations. However, most arrays use omnidirectional microphones that sample sounds with more or less equal eﬃciency in
all directions. Because microphone arrays capture directional
information, they allow the estimation of the direction and distance to the sound source.
Recording quality is another important factor. Researchers
must consider the sampling rate (samples per sec, or Hz) and
number of bits that are required, and whether these parameters
need to be adjusted dynamically. Sampling rate determines the
spectral range, and bit depth determines the dynamic range of
the recordings as well as the size of acoustic ﬁles and, thus, storage requirements (Appendix S1, Supporting Information)).
Environmental conditions have substantial impacts on the
durability and reliability of acoustic sampling units. Heating,
cooling or protecting from rain or humidity may be required
for both microphone and recording unit. Recorders with few
moving parts (e.g. those with ﬂash memory) may be more reliable in moist conditions. If animals (including humans) are
likely to disturb equipment, then camouﬂage, animal-proof

packaging or some sort of animal deterrent should be incorporated into the system.

LOCATION- AND TIME-CODING METHODS

Location and time annotations are a typical requirement of
multi-unit recording systems. To achieve this, a system must
maintain an estimate of the current location and time of each
unit, and the accuracy required by a speciﬁc application will
determine the appropriate method. For wired arrays, sensor
location is typically determined by a global positioning system
(GPS) using handheld devices (metre-level accuracy) or surveyor-grade equipment (centimetre-level accuracy). For cases
where only relative location is needed, other methods are available, including radio interferometry, which measures the diﬀerence in phase of signals received by each detector at varying
distances from the source signal location (Maroti et al. 2005).
Similarly, local time synchronization can be achieved by correlating local radio frequency (RF) transmissions recorded
simultaneously at each microphone and then compared using
a ﬁlter and correlation method to the precise time of the
recording by each speciﬁc node that transmits the signal (Collier, Kirschel & Taylor 2010). A concern in these techniques is
time synchronization. Slight synchronization diﬀerences
between clocks on diﬀerent nodes may lead to errors in
triangulation. The simplest way to address this problem is to
embed a time code in the recording itself that can be used later
in analysis.

COMMUNICATIONS AND DATA TRANSFER

Acoustic sensing systems may be developed from readily available components, or they may be custom-made. For example,
Patricelli and colleagues used rack-mountable studio hardware
and omnidirectional microphones to develop their eight-channel directionality array (Patricelli, Dantzker & Bradbury 2007,
2008) which was synchronized with a three-channel-video
array that measured changes in position and posture of singing
birds. This was later expanded to a 24-channel wired array in
which a commercial time-code generator was used to synchronize three separate eight-channel digitizing preampliﬁers and
record directly onto a computer (Krakauer et al. 2009; Patricelli & Krakauer 2010). The recent advent of portable fourand ﬁve-channel digital recorders designed for ﬁlmmakers
interested in collecting surround-sound recordings may provide multi-channel recording units for four- and ﬁve-channel
recording systems at a very low price. Rather than using available components to develop acoustic sensing systems, Girod
and colleagues (Girod et al. 2006; Allen et al. 2008) developed
ﬁrst the Acoustic ENSBOX and then VoxNet, both of which
are custom-built hardware solutions. The 32-channel VoxNet
wireless array comprises an embedded computer on each
4-microphone node, which can be controlled wirelessly by laptop or smartphone and records directly onto compact ﬂash
cards on each node (Collier, Kirschel & Taylor 2010). Similarly, Calupca, Fristrup & Clark (2000) have developed terrestrial autonomous recording units (TARU), which can be GPS

 2011 The Authors. Journal of Applied Ecology  2011 British Ecological Society, Journal of Applied Ecology, 48, 758–767

Acoustic monitoring 763
synchronized and easily customized for a variety of applications through ﬁrmware programming.

ﬁlters (Erbe et al. 1999) can perform quite well, even in higher
noise environments.

Signal recognition

FEATURE EXTRACTION

The methods for signal comparison and recognition used in
bioacoustics range from trained humans listening to recordings
and ⁄ or visually inspecting multi-channel spectrograms (e.g.
McGregor et al. 1997; Hobson et al. 2002; Mennill et al. 2006;
Patricelli, Dantzker & Bradbury 2008; Celis-Murillo, Deppe &
Allen 2009), to complex machine-based detection, measurement and classiﬁcation algorithms (e.g. Kogan & Margoliash
1998; Cortopassi & Bradbury 2000; Mellinger & Clark 2000;
Urazghildiiev & Clark 2006; Kirschel et al. 2009). Each of
these methods has advantages and limitations. Trained observers can cue on subtle pattern diﬀerences and reliably identify
and discriminate relevant sounds in acoustic recordings. However, given the quantity of data frequently collected during
acoustic studies, relying on human experts is a rate-limiting
step (Swiston & Mennill 2009) and often is impractical. Automated computer-aided signal recognition systems provide a
solution to this problem and are critical for the viability of
long-term monitoring studies.
The signal recognition process is typically broken into two
tasks: signal detection and signal classiﬁcation. Signal detection involves the extraction of structured sounds of interest
from random background noise. Signal classiﬁcation involves
the labelling of sounds into biologically relevant groups. The
following sections discuss the major tasks involved in automated signal detection and classiﬁcation and some of the most
pressing research challenges.

Once detected, a signal must be classiﬁed to determine
what type of signal it is (what species, which individual,
etc.). This may be done aurally or by visual inspection of
a sound spectrogram, or, alternatively, automated classiﬁcation methods can be used to assign labels to signals;
such methods can be based on exemplar libraries or on
pre-constructed models. Regardless of the classiﬁcation
method used, attribute generation or feature extraction is
a critical ﬁrst step (Deller, Proakis & Hansen 1993; Webb
2002). It is the acoustic features of the sound that are
used to identify signal type.
Traditionally, bioacousticians have measured features associated with a signal’s frequency and time characteristics from
waveforms, spectrograms and power spectra, and selected
measurements such as duration, bandwidth, centre frequency,
etc., by hand (e.g. Leong et al. 2002; Blumstein & Munos
2005), although several new software tools allow for automated parameter measurement. Machine-based feature extraction algorithms can provide for the rapid, repeatable
generation of unbiased signal feature sets. Some examples
include using mel-frequency cepstral coeﬃcients, detecting features based on signal energy distribution, on entropy or from
sound spectrograms.
Cepstral coeﬃcients are commonly used in human speech
processing and recognition (Davis & Mermelstein 1980; Hermansky 1990; Milner 2002) and have recently been used in
some wildlife studies (Soltis, Leong & Savage 2005b; Mazhar,
Ura & Bahl 2007) by adapting them for the diﬀerent hearing
abilities of the species under study (Clemins & Johnson 2006).
Cepstral coeﬃcients work well in classifying human speech
(e.g. for automated telephone systems), but might be limited
for other animals with diﬀerent signal structure. Alternative
approaches have been explored using more generic feature sets,
with no underlying assumptions of the sound production
model or the nature of the signal under study. One such
approach characterizes patterns of signal energy distribution
in time and frequency (Fristrup & Watkins 1992, 1993; Cortopassi 2006) and creates feature sets that can have been used to
classify marine mammal sounds from over 50 species (Fristrup
& Watkins 1993), explore inter- and intraspeciﬁc diﬀerences in
ﬂight calls from 14 species and 171 individuals of wood
warblers (Farnsworth 2007) and look at age and sex diﬀerences
in the vocalizations of African forest elephants (Thompson,
Payne & Schwager 2009). Similarly, Kirschel et al. (2009)
adopted a modiﬁed hill-climbing algorithm with a sliding
median energy plot to detect and extract features from over 30
individuals in a population of Mexican antthrush. Sound
spectrograms themselves can be used as feature sets, as is
particularly common in nearest-neighbour-based classiﬁcation
schemes (e.g. Pinkowski 1994; Baker & Logue 2003;
Cortopassi & Bradbury 2006; Farnsworth 2007). The feature
extraction method chosen has typically depended on the focus

SIGNAL DETECTION

Reliably, detecting signals of interest is an essential ﬁrst step
for automated processing. The salient portions of continuously
recorded audio are typically a small fraction of the total
recording time. Even if human experts are relied on for the
classiﬁcation task, having automated detection in place can
vastly reduce the amount of data to be reviewed (Swiston &
Mennill 2009). In addition, reliable automatic detection can
reduce the need for large data storage capacity in remote sensing equipment. Rather than recording continuously, only the
identiﬁed sounds of interest need to be recorded, thereby
reducing storage requirements.
However, any automated system suﬀers from false positives
and false negatives. The cost of false positives is that more data
are stored. However, the cost of false negatives is that the
sound of interest was not recorded and cannot be examined.
Systems should be designed to err on the side of false positive
detections.
The ability to reliably detect acoustic events depends largely
on the structure of the recording environment, the signal-tonoise ratio (SNR) and the complexity and variability of the
signals to be detected. For simple or complex sounds with
low variability, template-based detection algorithms using
spectrogram correlation (Mellinger & Clark 2000) or matched

 2011 The Authors. Journal of Applied Ecology  2011 British Ecological Society, Journal of Applied Ecology, 48, 758–767

764 D. T. Blumstein et al.
of the study. While automated techniques help to reduce
human eﬀort and possible bias, they have been designed with
speciﬁc target species’ signals in mind. More generic
approaches are desired and a few are beginning to appear, for
example in XBAT (Figueroa 2006; Cornell Laboratory of
Ornithology).

SIGNAL CLASSIFICATION

Classiﬁcation methods can be either supervised, in which
expertly labelled data are used to train the system, or unsupervised, in which the structure of the data itself guides decisionmaking about class membership. Supervised classiﬁcation
methods fall into two broad groupings. In instance-based
methods of classiﬁcation, a library of known exemplars is used
to assign class labels to unknowns based on feature similarity.
In model-based methods of classiﬁcation, abstract models are
built based on the features of known signals, and these models
assign labels to unknowns based on their attributes.
A variety of these classiﬁcation methods have been explored
in the bioacoustics literature on a diversity of animal taxa, with
varying feature sets and degrees of success (e.g. Fristrup &
Watkins 1993; Kogan & Margoliash 1998; Baker 2004;
Clemins et al. 2005). For example, Fristrup & Watkins (1993)
correctly classiﬁed up to 85% of marine mammal sounds,
Hayward (1997) 75% of marine mammal sounds, Kogan &
Margoliash (1998) up to 97% of indigo bunting Passerina
cyanea song units, Baker (2004) 96% of laughing kookaburra
Dacelo novaeguineae breeding groups, Clemins et al. (2005)
82–94% of African elephant call types and Trifa, Kirschel &
Taylor (2008) up to 99Æ5% of antbird species songs. Kirschel
et al. (2009) identiﬁed up to 99Æ4% of Mexican antthrush individuals using three supervised-learning techniques (discriminant function analysis, fuzzy logic and hidden Markov
models) and found that they all identiﬁed over 97% of
recorded songs to the correct individual, despite high levels of
rainforest background noise, though one unsupervised-learning method (self-organising maps) performed less well in classifying individuals. Automated classiﬁcation methods have the
potential to identify the individual animal, population or
species producing a sound with extremely high success rates,
allowing for the reliable processing of data from long-term
monitoring studies. However, automated classiﬁcation
methods may not work so well with all signal types, and certain
sounds such as alarm calls in birds, and navigation and
foraging calls of bats might be more challenging to identify to
species or individual.

Localization
By localizing animals acoustically, we can gain information
about the spatial dynamics of communication, count individual animals, map territories and assess population distribution
patterns. We may also be able to study the dynamics of movement and the response to anthropogenic stimuli.
One factor determining the accuracy of an acoustic location
system is the error in estimating the positions of sensors in the

array. Widely distributed arrays under forest canopy may suffer some loss of accuracy because of the impact of the canopy
on the GPS equipment used to measure microphone positions
(Mennill et al. 2006), though adopting an acoustic self survey
under forest canopy has yielded position of sensor estimates of
only 15 cm from ground truth measurements (Collier, Kirschel
& Taylor 2010). Topographic variation can also limit source
estimation accuracy; sensor elevation is typically known with
less certainty, and existing terrestrial algorithms may even
ignore the z-axis, using only x–y coordinates of microphone
locations. Even with such limitations, localization accuracy is
typically suﬃcient to distinguish the source among sets of individuals potentially producing sounds (McGregor et al. 1997).
We include a simple illustration of a microphone array localizing a vocalizing animal (Fig. 1).

LOCALIZATION BASED ON ARRAY PROCESSING

An array of microphones with time-synchronized data collection capability can be used in various ways for source localization. If there is only a single-sound source, a straightforward
approach is to perform cross-correlations among the waveforms from all microphones to extract their relative time
delays, from which the source location can be estimated in a
variety of ways (e.g. Spiesberger & Fristrup 1990; Clark & Ellison 2000; Bower & Clark 2005). One method is the correlation
sum approach, which involves computing cross-correlations
between waveforms from each channel and determining the
most probable source location by using the Hilbert amplitude
envelope of the cross-correlation functions (Collier, Kirschel &
Taylor 2010).

The future
The wide-scale application of acoustic recording and processing technology has the potential to transform the ﬁelds of ecology, behaviour and conservation biology by allowing us to
study animals in a standardized fashion at spatial and temporal resolutions and extents previously not possible and in environments that are diﬃcult to access or monitor using
conventional methods. Using acoustics to remotely track
changes in indicator species, biodiversity and soundscapes may
serve as an eﬃcient way to measure habitat quality and ecosystem health. Because acoustic sampling can be used to monitor
many taxonomic groups and environmental processes simultaneously, it can provide an integrative look at ecosystem
dynamics and functioning.
However, additional work is required to achieve this potential. For instance, while diﬀerent research groups have developed a variety of recording devices, it has proved diﬃcult to
share the progress made on each platform. The primary reason for this is that each application requires a customized
solution.
One of the most pressing challenges for bioacoustic monitoring is reliable signal recognition. Algorithms that provide a
conﬁdence or quality estimate for each detection or classiﬁcation can be helpful; the decision threshold can be adjusted

 2011 The Authors. Journal of Applied Ecology  2011 British Ecological Society, Journal of Applied Ecology, 48, 758–767

Acoustic monitoring 765
post-processing to adjust the ratio of false positives to false
negatives. In addition, it will be beneﬁcial to develop interactive environments that will allow experts to classify ambiguous
detections and then dynamically update the recognition scheme.
Environmental noise, equipment failure and natural biological variation can create heterogeneous data sets. Detection and
classiﬁcation algorithms and feature sets that are robust to
such data heterogeneities are desirable.
There is a growing need for a common framework in which
to develop, run and fully evaluate new bioacoustic recognition
systems. Such a framework would include standard performance metrics and visualization tools, techniques for parameter tuning, facilities for running detectors and classiﬁers and
generating feature sets and tools to determine the extent of
under- or over-ﬁtting of a system to training data. Also needed
is a standard corpus of data sets that can be analysed by a variety of recognition systems to determine the relative strengths
and weaknesses of each system. The determination of a standard data format, standard problem classes and a metadata
standard for the ﬁeld of bioacoustics that includes acoustic
recording parameters and behavioural or species-speciﬁc information would catalyze this eﬀort, because data sets could be
analysed using any recognition system that supported these
standards. A variety of acoustic data browsing systems with
extensible signal detection and measurement capabilities
already exist, including software programs such as Raven
(Charif, Waack & Strickman 2008) and XBAT (Figueroa
2006; Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology), Syrinx-PC (J. Burt,
Seattle, WA, USA) and AviSoft SAS-Lab Pro (R. Sprecht,
Berlin, Germany). In addition, WEKA (Witten & Frank 2005)
and R (Venables, Smith and the R Development Core Team
2008) are platforms suitable for machine learning and classiﬁcation. Each system has unique capabilities and limitations.
Currently, none provide a fully integrated solution to the task
of signal recognition.
To facilitate the development of common standards, the
community should set up a website or wiki to serve as a repository for collective experiences and knowledge. Alternatively,
some existing web resources could accommodate such a repository (e.g. the Bioacoustics listserv: http://www.mail-archive.
com/bioacoustics-l@cornell.edu/maillist.html). In future,
these online resources could include information for speciﬁc
popular platforms, such as ‘how-to’ documents, ﬁrmware
images, instructions for integrating systems and acoustic data
sets for testing and comparing algorithms.
To enhance development and adoption of new technology,
researchers should write papers that document experiences.
Such papers can document and explain the pitfalls and lessons
learned about bioacoustic deployments and platforms. Often,
researchers discussing their experiences ﬁnd that they independently discovered and solved the same challenges.
To stimulate hardware development, the bioacoustic
community should develop and capitalize on industry partnerships. There may be opportunities to outsource the details of
manufacturing certain types of equipment to existing hardware
suppliers. If there is a suﬃcient market for the proposed
system, this can be a low-risk way for these companies to

increase their volumes. It may also reduce the cost of hardware
components.
Ultimately, we believe that the future for bioacoustic monitoring in the terrestrial environment is bright. Fostering discussions and collaborations within the bioacoustic community
and among disciplines will be the key to successfully meeting
our challenges and ushering in a new era of research in ecology,
animal behaviour and conservation biology.

Acknowledgements
This paper emerged from an NSF funded workshop on bioacoustic monitoring in the terrestrial environment (NSF IDBR 0731674), held at the University of California’s James Reserve. Additional workshop support came from
the James Reserve, and the Center For Embedded Network Sensing at
UCLA. D.T.B., L.G. and K.Y. are supported by NSF-DBI-0754247, and
A.N.G.K. was supported by NSF-0410438. We thank Becca Fenwick and
Mihaela Tomuta for logistical support, Charles Taylor for being a co-PI on
the grant, the conference participants for stimulating discussions, and the
editor, Kamran Saﬁ and three anonymous referees for very constructive
comments on previous versions of this manuscript that helped us hone our
message.

References
Allen, M., Girod, L., Newton, R., Madden, S., Blumstein, D.T. & Estrin, D.
(2008) VoxNet: an interactive, rapidly-deployable acoustic monitoring platform. IPSN ‘08: Information Processing in Sensor Networks, pp. 371–382:
Cogent Comp., ARC, Coventry University, Coventry.
Baker, M.C. (2004) The chorus song of cooperatively breeding laughing kookaburras (Coraciiformes, Halcyonidae: Dacelo novaeguinea): characterization
and comparison among groups. Ethology, 110, 21–35.
Baker, M.C. & Logue, D.M. (2003) Population diﬀerentiation in a complex
bird sound: a comparison of three bioacoustical analysis procedures. Ethology, 109, 223–242.
Blumstein, D.T. & Fernández-Juricic, E. (2010) A Primer of Conservation
Behavior. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, MA.
Blumstein, D.T. & Munos, O. (2005) Individual and age ⁄ sex class variation in
marmot alarm calls. Animal Behaviour, 69, 353–361.
Bower, J.L. & Clark, C.W. (2005) A ﬁeld test of the accuracy of a passive acoustic location system. Bioacoustics, 15, 1–14.
Brandes, T.S. (2005) Acoustic monitoring protocol. Tropical Ecology Assessment
and Monitoring (TEAM) Initiative. Conservation International, Washington, D.C.
Calupca, T.A., Fristrup, K.M. & Clark, C.W. (2000) A compact digital recording system for autonomous bioacoustic monitoring. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 108, 2582.
Celis-Murillo, A., Deppe, J.L. & Allen, M.F. (2009) Using soundscape recordings to estimate bird species abundance, richness, and composition. Journal
of Field Ornithology, 80, 64–78.
Charif, R.A., Waack, A.M. & Strickman, L.M. (2008) Raven Pro 1.3 User’s
Manual. Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology, Ithaca, NY.
Clark, C.W. & Ellison, W.T. (2000) Calibration and comparison of the acoustic
location methods used during the spring migration of the bowhead whale,
Balaena mysticetus, oﬀ Pt. Barrow, Alaska, 1984-1993. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 107, 3509–3517.
Clemins, P.J. & Johnson, M.T. (2006) Generalized perceptual linear prediction
features for animal vocalization analysis. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 120, 527–534.
Clemins, P.J., Johnson, M.T., Leong, K.M. & Savage, A. (2005) Automatic classiﬁcation and speaker identiﬁcation of African elephant (Loxodonta africana)
vocalizations. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 117, 956–963.
Collier, T.C., Kirschel, A.N.G. & Taylor, C.E. (2010) Acoustic localization of
antbirds in a Mexican rainforest using a wireless sensor network. Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, 128, 182–189.
Collier, T.C., Blumstein, D.T., Girod, L. & Taylor, C.E. (2010) Is alarm
calling risky? Marmots avoid calling from risky places. Ethology, 166, 1171–
1178.
Cortopassi, K.A. 2006. Automated and Robust Measurement of Signal Features.
http://www.birds.cornell.edu/brp/research/algorithm/automated-and-robustmeasurement-of-signal-features.

 2011 The Authors. Journal of Applied Ecology  2011 British Ecological Society, Journal of Applied Ecology, 48, 758–767

766 D. T. Blumstein et al.
Cortopassi, K.A. & Bradbury, J.W. (2000) The comparison of harmonically
rich sounds using spectrographic cross-correlation and principal coordinates
analysis. Bioacoustics, 11, 89–127.
Cortopassi, K.A. & Bradbury, J.W. (2006) Contact call diversity in wild
orange-fronted parakeet pairs, Aratinga canicularis. Animal Behaviour, 71,
1141–1154.
Courch III, W.B. & Paton, P.W.C. (2002) Assessing the use of call surveys to
monitor breeding anurans in Rhode Island. Journal of Herpetology, 36, 185–
192.
Dabelsteen, T. (2005) Public, private or anonymous? Facilitating and countering eavesdropping. Animal Communication Networks (ed P.K. McGregor),
pp. 36–82. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Dantzker, M.S. & Bradbury, J.W. (2006) Vocal sacs and their role in avian
acoustic display. Acta Zoologica Sinica, 52, 486–488.
Dantzker, M.S., Deane, G.B. & Bradbury, J.W. (1999) Directional acoustic
radiation in the strut display of male sage grouse Centrocercus urophasianus.
Journal of Experimental Biology, 202, 2893–2909.
Davis, S.B. & Mermelstein, P. (1980) Comparison of parametric
representations for monosyllabic word recognition in continuously spoken
sentences. IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing,
28, 357–366.
Delaney, D.K., Gurbb, T.G., Seibr, P., Pater, L.L. & Reiser, M.H. (1999)
Eﬀects of helicopter noise on Mexican spotted owls. Journal of Wildlife Management, 63, 60–76.
Deller, J.R., Proakis, J.G. & Hansen, J.H.L. (1993) Discrete-time Processing of
Speech Signals. Macmillan Publishing Company, New York.
Erbe, C., King, A.R., Yedlin, M. & Farmer, D.M. (1999) Computer models for
masked hearing experiments with beluga whales (Delphinapterus leucas).
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 105, 2967–2978.
Farnsworth, A. (2007) Flight-calls of wood-warblers are not associated exclusively with migratory behaviors. Wilson Journal of Ornithology, 119, 334–
341.
Farnsworth, A. & Russell, R.W. (2007) Monitoring ﬂight calls of migrating
birds from an oil platform in the northern Gulf of Mexico. Journal of Field
Ornithology, 78, 279–289.
Figueroa, H.K. (2006) XBAT: Extensible BioAcoustic Tool. http://xbat.org.
Fischer, P.F., Schulz, U., Schubert, H., Knapp, P. & Schmöger, M. (1997)
Quantitative assessment of grassland quality: acoustic determination of population sizes of Orthopteran indicator species. Ecological Applications, 7,
909–920.
Fitzpatrick, J.W., Lammertink, M., Luneau, M.D.J., Gallagher, T.W., Harrison, B.R., Sparling, G.M., Rosenberg, K.V., Rohrbaugh, R.W., Swarthout,
E.C.H., Wrege, P.H., Swarthout, S.B., Dantzker, M.S., Charif, R.A., Barksdale, T.R., Remsen, J.V.J., Simon, S.D. & Zollner, D. (2005) Ivory-billed
Woodpecker (Campephilus principalis) persists in continental North America. Science, 308, 1460–1462.
Fitzsimmons, L.P., Foote, J.R., Ratcliﬀe, L.M. & Mennill, D.J. (2008a) Frequency matching, overlapping, and movement behaviour in diurnal countersinging interactions of black-capped chickadees. Animal Behaviour, 75,
1913–1920.
Fitzsimmons, L.P., Foote, J.R., Ratcliﬀe, L.M. & Mennill, D.J. (2008b)
Eavesdropping and communication networks revealed through stereo
playback and an acoustic location system. Behavioral Ecology, 19, 824–
829.
Foote, J.R., Fitzsimmons, L.P., Mennill, D.J. & Ratcliﬀe, L.M. (2008a) Male
chickadees match neighbours interactively at dawn: support for the social
dynamics hypothesis. Behavioral Ecology, 19, 1192–1199.
Foote, J.R., Fitzsimmons, L.P., Mennill, D.J. & Ratcliﬀe, L.M. (2008b) Tied to
the nest: male black-capped chickadees decrease dawn chorus movement
behaviour when their mate is fertile. Animal Behaviour, 76, 1227–1233.
Forrest, T.G. (1991) Power output and eﬃciency of sound output by crickets.
Behavioral Ecology, 2, 327–338.
Fristrup, K.M. & Watkins, W.A. (1992) Characterizing Acoustic Features of
Marine Animal Sounds (Technical Report WHOI-92-04). Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole, MA.
Fristrup, K.M. & Watkins, W.A. (1993) Marine Animal Sound Classiﬁcation
(Technical Report WHOI-94-13). Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution,
Woods Hole, MA.
Gibson, R.M., Bradbury, J.W. & Vehrencamp, S.L. (1991) Mate choice in lekking sage grouse revisited: the roles of vocal display, female site ﬁdelity, and
copying. Behavioral Ecology, 2, 165–180.
Girod, L., Lukac, M., Trifa, V. & Estrin, D. (2006) The design and implementation of a self-calibrating distributed acoustic sensing platform. Proc. of the
4th International Conference on Ebedded Sensing Systems (SenSys06), Boulder, CO, Nov 1-3 2006.

Halfwerk, W., Holleman, L.J.M., Lessels, C.M. & Slabbekoorn, H. (2011)
Negative impact of traﬃc noise on avian reproductive success. Journal of
Applied Ecology, 48, 210–219.
Haselmayer, J. & Quinn, J.S. (2000) A comparison of point counts and sound
recording as bird survey methods in Amazonian Southeast Peru. Condor,
102, 887–893.
Hayward, T.J. (1997) Classiﬁcation by multiple-resolution statistical analysis
with application to automated recognition of marine mammal sounds. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 101, 1516–1526.
Hermansky, H. (1990) Perceptual linear predictive (PLP) analysis for
speech recognition. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 87, 1738–
1752.
Hill, G.E., Mennill, D.J., Rolek, B.W., Hicks, T.L. & Swiston, K.A. (2006) Evidence suggesting that ivory-billed woodpeckers exist in Florida. Avian
Conservation and Ecology – Écologie et conservation des oiseaux, 1, 2. [online
access].
Hobson, K.A., Rempel, R.S., Greenwood, B., Turnbull, B. & Van Wilgenburg,
S.L. (2002) Acoustic surveys of birds using electronic recordings: new potential from an omnidirectional microphone system. Wildlife Society Bulletin,
30, 709–720.
Holderied, M.W., Jones, G. & von Helverson, O. (2006) Flight and echolocation behaviour of whiskered bats commuting along a hedgerow: rangedependent sonar signal design, Doppler tolerance and evidence for ‘acoustic
focussing’. Journal of Experimental Biology, 209, 1816–1826.
Hults, C. & Burson, S. (2006) Soundscapes of Denali National Park and Preserve. Alaska Park Science, 5, 20–22.
Hüppop, O., Dierschke, J., Exo, K.M., Fredrich, E. & Hill, R. (2006) Bird
migration studies and potential collision risk with oﬀshore wind turbines.
IBIS, 148, 90–109.
Jones, G. & Holderied, M.W. (2007) Bat echolocation calls: adaptation and
convergent evolution. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Series B,
274, 905–912.
Kirschel, A.N.G., Earl, D.A., Yao, Y., Escobar, I., Vilches, E., Vallejo, E.E. &
Taylor, C.E. (2009) Using songs to identify individual Mexican Antthrush
(Formicarius moniliger): a comparison of four classiﬁcation methods. Bioacoustics, 19, 1–20.
Kirschel, A.N.G., Cody, M.L., Harlow, Z.T., Promponas, V., Vallejo, E.E. &
Taylor, C.E. 2011. Territorial dynamics of Mexican Antthrushes revealed by
individual recognition of their songs. IBIS, 153, 255–268.
Kogan, J. & Margoliash, D. (1998) Automated recognition of bird song elements from continuous recordings using dynamic time warping and hidden
Markov models: a comparative study. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 103, 2185–2196.
Krakauer, A.H., Tyrrell, M., Lehmann, K., Losin, N., Goller, F. & Patricelli,
G.L. (2009) Vocal and anatomical evidence for a two-voiced system in the
greater sage-grouse (Centrocercus urophasianus). Journal of Experimental
Biology, 212, 3719–3727.
Lammers, M.O. & Au, W.W.L. (2003) Directionality in the whistles of Hawaiian spinner dolphins (Stenella longirostris): a signal feature to cue direction
of movement? Marine Mammal Science, 19, 249–264.
Leong, K.M., Ortolani, A., Burks, K.D., Mellen, J.D. & Savage, A. (2002)
Quantifying acoustic and temporal characteristics of vocalizations of a
group of captive African elephants (Loxodonta africana). Bioacoustics, 13,
213–231.
Leong, K.M., Ortolani, A., Graham, L.H. & Savage, A. (2003) The use of lowfrequency vocalizations in African elephant Loxodonta africana) reproductive strategies. Hormones and Behavior, 43, 433–443.
Lippold, S., Fitzsimmons, L.P., Foote, J.R., Ratcliﬀe, L.M. & Mennill, D.J.
(2008) Post-contest behaviour in black-capped chickadees (Poecile atricapillus): loser displays, not victory displays, follow asymmetrical countersinging
exchanges. Acta Ethologia, 11, 67–72.
MacSwiney, G., Cristina, M., Clarke, F.M. & Racey, P.A. (2008) What you see
is not what you get: the role of ultrasonic detectors in increasing inventory
completeness in Neotropical bat assemblages. Journal of Applied Ecology,
45, 1364–1371.
Maroti, M., Kusy, B., Balogh, G., Volgyesi, P., Nadas, A., Molnar, K., Dora,
S. & Ledeczi, A. (2005) Radio interferometric geolocation. Proceedings of
the 3rd international conference on Embedded networked sensor systems (SenSys’05), 1–12.
Márquez, R., Llusia, D., Beltrán, J.F., do Amaral, J.P. & Bowkers, R.G.
(2008) Anurans, the group of terrestrial vertebrates most vulnerable to climate change: a case study with acoustic monitoring in the Iberian Peninsula. Computational Bioacoustics for Assessing Biodiversity (eds K.H.
Frommolt, R. Bardeli & M. Clausen), pp. 4–52. BfN-Skripten, Isle of
Vilm, Germany.

 2011 The Authors. Journal of Applied Ecology  2011 British Ecological Society, Journal of Applied Ecology, 48, 758–767

Acoustic monitoring 767
Mazhar, S., Ura, T. & Bahl, R. (2007) Vocalization based individual classiﬁcation of humpback whales using support vector machine. Proceedings of
IEEE International Conference on Oceanic Engineering (OCEANS 2007),
1621–1629.
McGregor, P.K. (2005) Animal Communication Networks. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
McGregor, P.K., Dabelsteen, T., Clark, C.W., Bower, J.L., Tavares, J.P. &
Holland, J. (1997) Accuracy of a passive acoustic location system: empirical
studies in terrestrial habitats. Ethology, Ecology, and Evolution, 9, 269–286.
Mellinger, D.K. & Clark, C.W. (2000) Recognizing transient low-frequency
whale sounds by spectrogram correlation. Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, 107, 3518–3529.
Mennill, D.J. & Vehrencamp, S.L. (2008) Context-dependent functions of
avian duets revealed through microphone array recordings and multispeaker playback. Current Biology, 18, 1314–1319.
Mennill, D.J., Burt, J.M., Fristrup, K.M. & Vehrencamp, S.L. (2006) Accuracy
of an acoustic location system for monitoring the position of duetting songbirds in tropical forest. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 119,
2832–2839.
Miller, N.P. (2008) US National Parks and management of park soundscapes:
a review. Applied Acoustics, 69, 77–92.
Milner, B. (2002) A comparison of front-end conﬁgurations for robust speech
recognition. Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech, and Signal Processing, 797–800.
Obrist, M.K., Boesch, R. & Flückeger, P. (2008) Probabilistic evaluation of
synergetic ultrasound pattern recognition for large scale bat surveys In: computational bioacoustics for assessing biodiversity. Proceedings of the International Expert meeting on IT-based detection of bioacoustical patterns,
December 7th until December 10th, 2007 at the International Academy for
Nature Conservation (eds K.H. Frommolt, R. Bardeli & M. Clausen), pp.
43–52. BfN-Skripten, Isle of Vilm, Germany.
Odom, K.J. & Mennill, D.J. (2010) Vocal duets in a nonpasserine: an examination of territory defense and neighbour-stranger discrimination in a neighbourhood of barred owls. Behaviour, 147, 619–639.
Parker III, T.A. (1991) On the use of tape recorders in avifaunal surveys. Auk,
108, 443–444.
Patricelli, G.L., Dantzker, M.S. & Bradbury, J.W. (2007) Diﬀerences in acoustic directionality among vocalizations of the male red-winged blackbird
(Agelaius phoeniceus) are related to function in communication. Behavioral
Ecology Sociobiology, 61, 1099–1110.
Patricelli, G.L., Dantzker, M.S. & Bradbury, J.W. (2008) Acoustic directionality of red-winged blackbird (Agelaius phoeniceus) song relates to amplitude
and singing behaviour. Animal Behaviour, 76, 1389–1401.
Patricelli, G.L. & Krakauer, A.H. (2010) Tactical allocation of display eﬀort
reduces trade-oﬀs among multiple sexual signals in greater sage-grouse: an
experiment with a robotic female. Behavioral Ecology, 21, 97–106.
Payne, K.B., Thompson, M. & Kramer, L. (2003) Elephant calling patterns as
indicators of group size and composition: the basis for an acoustic monitoring system. African Journal of Ecology, 41, 99–107.
Pinkowski, B. (1994) Robust Fourier descriptors for characterizing amplitude
modulated waveform shapes. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
95, 3419–3423.
Riede, K. (1993) Monitoring biodiversity: analysis of Amazonian rainforest
sounds. Ambio, 22, 546–548.
Riede, K. (1998) Acoustic monitoring of Orthoptera and its potential for conservation. Journal of Insect Conservation, 2, 217–223.
Slabbekoorn, H. & den Boer-Visser, A. (2006) Cities change the songs of birds.
Current Biology, 16, 2326–2331.

Soltis, J., Leong, K.M. & Savage, A. (2005a) African elephant vocal communication I: antiphonal calling behavior among aﬃliated females. Animal
Behaviour, 70, 579–587.
Soltis, J., Leong, K. & Savage, A. (2005b) African elephant vocal communication II: rumble variation reﬂects the individual identity and emotional state
of callers. Animal Behaviour, 70, 589–599.
Spiesberger, J.L. & Fristrup, K.M. (1990) Passive localization of calling animals and sensing of their acoustic environment using acoustic tomography.
American Naturalist, 135, 107–153.
Swiston, K.A. & Mennill, D.J. (2009) Comparison of manual and automated
cross-correlation methods for identifying target sounds in continuous audio
recordings of Pileated, Pale-billed, and putative Ivory-billed Woodpeckers.
Journal of Field Ornithology, 80, 42–50.
Thompson, M.E., Payne, K.E. & Schwager, S.J. (2009) Heard but not seen: an
acoustic survey of the African forest elephant population at Kakum Conservation Area, Ghana. African Journal of Ecology, 48, 224–231.
Tremain, S.B., Swiston, K.A. & Mennill, D.J. (2008) Seasonal variation
in acoustic signals of pileated woodpeckers (Dryocopus pileatus). Wilson
Journal of Ornithology, 120, 499–504.
Trifa, V.M., Kirschel, A.N.G. & Taylor, C.E. (2008) Automated species recognition of antbirds in a Mexican rainforest using hidden Markov models.
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 123, 2424–2431.
Urazghildiiev, I.R. & Clark, C.W. (2006) Acoustic detection of North Atlantic
right whale contact calls using the generalized likelihood ratio test. Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, 120, 1956–1963.
Venables, W.N. & Smith, D.M. & the R Development Core Team. (2008) An
Introduction to R. Available at http://www.r-project.org/.
Webb, A.R. (2002) Statistical Pattern Recognition, Second Edition. John Wiley
and Sons, Ltd., New York.
Witten, I.H. & Frank, E. (2005) Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning
Tools and Techniques, 2nd edn. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San
Francisco.
Received 21 January 2011; accepted 9 March 2011
Handling Editor: Nathalie Pettorelli

Supporting Information
Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article.
Appendix S1. Other considerations for designing an acoustic monitoring system.
Table S1. A survey of terrestrial studies that employed multi-channel
arrays of microphones.
As a service to our authors and readers, this journal provides supporting information supplied by the authors. Such materials may be
reorganized for online delivery, but are not copy-edited or typeset.
Technical support issues arising from supporting information (other
than missing ﬁles) should be addressed to the authors.

 2011 The Authors. Journal of Applied Ecology  2011 British Ecological Society, Journal of Applied Ecology, 48, 758–767

