Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1327–1344
DOI 10.1007/s10980-011-9635-x

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Soundscape conservation
Sarah L. Dumyahn • Bryan C. Pijanowski

Received: 11 January 2011 / Accepted: 4 July 2011 / Published online: 19 July 2011
 Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2011

Abstract We argue that soundscapes possess both
ecological and social value and that they should be
considered natural resources worthy of management
and conservation. In this paper we bring together
diverse bodies of literature that identify the human
and ecological benefits provided by soundscapes.
Sense of place, cultural significance, interactions with
landscape perceptions, and wildlife wellbeing are a
few of the values ascribed to soundscapes. The values
and benefits of soundscapes are motivation to
advance soundscape conservation and management.
Given that soundscape conservation is new, we
present a summary of conservation principles that
need to be considered in soundscape conservation
planning. These include the need to set goals, identify
targets, assess condition, identify and manage threats,
and conduct monitoring of the soundscape. We also
argue that soundscape conservation needs to consider
the soundscape within the larger mosaic of the
landscape that is occupied by humans—a perspective
provided by landscape ecology. We describe several
different kinds of soundscapes that need to be
conserved, such as natural quiet, sensitive, threatened, and unique soundscapes, and the ways that
conservation planning can protect these for the future.

S. L. Dumyahn (&)  B. C. Pijanowski
Department of Forestry and Natural Resources, Purdue
University, 195 Marsteller Street, West Lafayette,
IN 47907, USA
e-mail: slharvey@purdue.edu

Keywords Soundscapes  Conservation 
Aesthetics  Values  Noise  Landscapes

Introduction
Human domination of natural habitats has resulted in
the loss of biodiversity (Vitousek et al. 1997; Chapin
et al. 2000; Perrings et al. 2010; Rands et al. 2010).
The loss of species is so significant that some have
concluded that we are experiencing the sixth extinction event (Pimm et al. 1995; Wilson 1999). In the
recent past, biodiversity conservation has become not
only a new discipline, but also a global priority and
research agenda item (Soulé 1985; UNEP 1992;
Sutherland et al. 2009). With the loss of habitat and
biodiversity, areas lose their natural sounds (Wrightson 2000; Pijanowski et al. 2011a). Natural sounds
have been referred to as an endangered resource as
the ability to experience them becomes increasingly
rare (Jensen and Thompson 2004).
In addition to the world losing natural sounds, our
planet is gaining in the temporal and spatial reach of
human-generated sounds (Schafer 1994). Humangenerated sounds can include motorized transportation, such as global air travel, sounds from industrial
and domestic machines, road noise due to friction, the
sounding of bells, sirens, alarms, and human voices.
Sometimes these sounds are subjectively deemed
noise by a listener (Truax 1999). The ever expanding

123

1328

transportation systems for aircraft, railways, and
highways contribute to some of the most ubiquitous
sources of noise (Miller 2002). Human-generated
sounds continue to spread to even remote, natural
areas (Berglund et al. 1999; Wrightson 2000). While
most attention has been on regulating individual
sources of noise, such as those from airports, little
attention has been given to conserving the natural
acoustic environment, or natural soundscape, and its
positive associated values.
Some researchers (i.e. Schafer 1994; Krause 2002)
and natural resource agencies (i.e. National Park
Service 2006) have begun to recognize soundscapes
as resources. By treating soundscapes as resources, a
new approach for conservation and management can
be developed; one that is fundamentally different
from incrementally regulating noise sources. In order
to create a rationale for soundscape conservation, the
associated values of this resource need to be clearly
identified and linked in meaningful ways within the
larger social-ecological system. Understanding
soundscape values strengthens the motivation and
justification for conservation and management
actions. It has been recognized that conservation
needs to be guided by a set of principles, a common
vocabulary, and a classification system that allows
managers and scientists to set goals and determine
how management practices alter outcomes (e.g.,
Soulé 1985; Groom et al. 2006). Advancing soundscape conservation will require a similar set of
guidelines organized around a classification system
that identifies high priority soundscapes.
The purpose of this paper is to present an argument
that soundscapes are natural resources worthy of
conservation. First, we define soundscapes as natural
resources. Second, we posit that soundscapes possess
certain values, socially and ecologically, and therefore need to be conserved. Third, we provide a
framework for soundscape conservation derived from
principles of landscape ecology (e.g., Wiens 2009)
and conservation biology (e.g., Groom et al. 2006).

Defining soundscapes as natural resources
The soundscape concept was formalized in the 1970s
by R. Murray Schafer, a composer and researcher
interested in the acoustic environment. He defined
soundscapes as ‘‘any acoustic field of study’’

123

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1327–1344

including the acoustic elements of actual environments or more abstract environments such as musical
compositions (Schafer 1994, p. 7). Schafer founded
the multidisciplinary study of acoustic ecology.
Acoustic ecology emphasizes the human system:
human perceptions and the value of listening. Truax
(1999), a colleague of Schafer’s, defines acoustic
ecology as the study of the effects of the relationship
between humans and the soundscape emphasizing
individual responses and perceptions. Three soundscape features and the way we perceive them were
categorized by Schafer (1994): keynote sounds,
sound signals, and soundmarks. Keynote sounds are
the background tones of an environment that are
directly influenced by geography and climate including wind, water, animals, vegetation, and geological
features. These sounds are not listened to consciously, but may deeply imprint on a person’s sense
of place. Sound signals, in contrast to keynotes, are
listened to consciously, since typically they convey
information or warnings (e.g., train whistles, car
horns, or ambulance sirens). Soundmarks, like landmarks, are sounds unique to specific locations.
Unique soundscapes can then be defined as soundscape patterns that allow places to be differentiated
(O’Connor 2008).
Through our perceptions of and interactions with
soundscapes, humans construct meaning and understanding of their surroundings (Truax 1999). Thompson (2002) described the relationship between the
soundscape resource and the human listener as a
cultural construction. As Thompson (2002) eludes,
humans derive different benefits from soundscapes
based on their personal frame of reference, from more
analytical to emphasizing the aesthetic, and the
interactions with the surrounding environment. Some
of the socially important values that are ascribed to
soundscapes include creating a sense of place,
providing cultural and historical heritage values,
interacting with landscape perceptions, and connecting humans to the nature. Additionally, how humans
perceive environmental quality based soundscapes
raises important resource considerations (Sonyerd
2004). Since humans utilize soundscapes for different
cultural and social benefits or services, they represent
a resource (Kraft 2007).
Soundscapes also are an ecological resource. While
identified and recognized by humans, soundscapes are
utilized by a variety of wildlife species. Krause (2002)

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1327–1344

contributed to the definition of soundscapes referring
to them as all of sounds present in an environment at a
given time. Krause grouped sounds into three categories: biophony (sounds from non-human organisms),
geophony (geophysical sounds) and anthrophony
(human-generated sounds). In his Acoustic Niche
Hypothesis, Krause (1987) posited that soundscapes
can provide available acoustic niches for vocalizing
species and that stable and healthy ecosystems exhibit
soundscapes with complex and discriminate use of
frequency and temporal acoustic niches. If the soundscape is composed of anthrophony, such as low
frequency motorized sounds, the previously available
niches may be filled masking species vocalizations or
other sounds important for species survival (Barber
et al. 2010). By vocalizing species communication
filling a niche, these natural sounds in the landscape
essentially represent a functional component of an
ecosystem (in sensu Chapin et al. 1997; Hooper et al.
2005). Alteration of either species composition and/or
the soundscape through modification of the acoustic
properties could impact the functioning of ecosystems.
Thus, management of soundscapes needs to consider
specific sounds, as well as all sounds collectively.
Some government agencies have identified that
sounds should be managed. Internationally, the
European Commission adopted a directive on the
assessment and management of noise (European
Union 2002; King et al. 2011). The policy objectives
include assessing noise conditions in urban areas, as
well as ‘‘open country’’ or other noise sensitive areas
to preserve quiet areas (European Union 2002). The
U.S. National Park Service (NPS) identifies soundscapes as a resource and considers all of the natural
sounds within parks and their interactions to encompass the natural soundscape (NPS 2006). NPS
management policies address the protection and
management of soundscapes, similar to other park
natural resources, stating, ‘‘the Service will restore to
the natural condition wherever possible those park
soundscapes that have become degraded by unnatural
sounds (noise), and will protect natural soundscapes
from unacceptable impacts’’ (2006, p. 56). Recognizing the interactions between soundscapes and
landscapes is important for site-specific conservation
activities. Indeed, parks and protected areas illustrate
this concept well, since park soundscapes are
expected to reflect the wildlife, geophysical features,
or other elements being protected (Mace et al. 1999).

1329

Pijanowski et al. (2011b, this issue) further
elaborated on the connection between sounds and
landscapes by defining soundscape ecology as all
‘‘biological, geophysical, and anthropogenic sounds
that emanate from a landscape and which vary over
space and time reflecting important ecosystem processes and human activities.’’ This definition identifies soundscapes as an audible reflection of the
landscape and indicates the social and ecological
significance of this resource. We build on the
importance of this resource within the context of
associated values.

Understanding soundscape values
The motivation for natural resource conservation and
caring has been linked to the values associated with
the resources (Rolston 1988; Harmon and Putney
2003; Sagoff 2004). For this paper, value is defined as
‘‘that which has worth: something of merit, something estimable- whether or not such worth is
assigned or recognized by people’’ (Harmon 2003,
p. 13). Natural resource values have been described
also as benefits (Steins and Edwards 1999) and
ecosystem services (MEA 2005). The environmental
philosopher Holmes Rolston III states that objective
values within nature are ‘‘discovered, not generated
by the valuer’’ (1988, p. 116). Discovered values
within nature are referred to as intrinsic values. Once
discovered, intrinsic values can be appreciated by
people thereby gaining instrumental value, or that
which serves a purpose. Instrumental values can be
tangible providing a product or economic benefit.
Other instrumental values are intangible. Several
types of intangible values have been identified for
natural resources including: recreational, cultural,
spiritual, therapeutic, identity or sense of place,
existence and bequest values, research and monitoring, educational, and artistic (Harmon 2003). In this
paper we review many of these same values as they
are applied to natural soundscapes.
Soundscape ecology as an emerging science recognizes the importance of understanding interactions
and feedbacks between humans and soundscapes
(Pijanowski et al. 2011b, this issue). Evidenced in
the conceptual diagram of soundscape processes, the
soundscape is linked to features of the natural environment, such as biodiversity and landforms, and

123

1330

human systems (Fig. 1). Utilizing a social-ecological
context the importance and value of soundscapes for
both humans and wildlife can be considered. We
recognize that how wildlife and humans perceive and
respond to sounds will vary. Similarly, individual
human perceptions and responses to sounds also are
not universal. With this in mind, we acknowledge that
different social and ecological research approaches are
necessary to understand these dynamics.
Landscapes and soundscapes can be directly
perceived by humans and wildlife. Soundscapes are
perceived with our sense of hearing, whereas landscapes are perceived visually or through our other
senses. Being in this ‘‘perceptible realm,’’ soundscapes are a direct connection between humans and
natural systems (Gobster et al. 2007). In Fig. 2 we
demonstrate the process of human perceptions of
soundscape patterns and resulting values and potential behaviors. Humans are able to perceive, evaluate
the experience, form attitudes, and strengthen or
create values from the soundscapes that they experience. These values can influence the form of human
behaviors in regards to soundscapes (Fig. 2; see
Ajzen 1991 for more on behavior theory). An
individual’s behaviors are also influenced by many
other factors, such as knowledge and education
(Rogers 2003). By understanding soundscape values
and providing information and educational opportunities, it is possible to have individuals change their
behavior toward this resource (Harmon 2003).
Soundscape conservation measures and management
are more likely with a shared understanding of the
multitude of soundscape values.
We present the following values associated with
soundscape quality in this paper: human health and
wellbeing, wildlife impacts, sense of place, landscape
interactions, and ecological integrity values
(Table 1).

Fig. 1 Soundscape system emphasizing the main sources of
sound (modified from Pijanowski et al. 2011b)

123

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1327–1344

Human and wildlife wellbeing
In soundscapes degraded by noise pollution, the
benefits of healthy soundscapes for human and
wildlife wellbeing become readily apparent. A large
body of literature documents the effects of noise
exposure on human physical and mental health
(Staples 1996; Passchier-Vermeer and Passchier
2000). Auditory health research has established clear
relationships between decibel level exposure and
associated hearing loss (Passchier-Vermeer and Passchier 2000). Other health effects from chronic noise
exposure have been found to include stress, annoyance, cardiovascular effects in adults, sleep disturbance, and decreased task performance (Evans et al.
1995; Bronzaft et al. 1998; Stansfeld and Matheson
2003). Children exposed to chronic noise have a
higher likelihood of reading deficits and declines in
other academic tasks (Evans and Maxwell 1997;
Haines et al. 2002). Quality of life impacts for people
in noisy areas has been assessed by researchers, as
well (Staples 1996; Bowles and Schulte-Fortkamp
2008). Noise detracts from human wellbeing and
other values, such as peace and tranquility (Sonyerd
2004; Pheasant et al. 2010). There is strong evidence
that human health and wellbeing are impaired when
exposed to degraded soundscapes raising issues of
rights to access a healthy acoustic environment
(Berglund et al. 1999; Brainard et al. 2004).
Degraded soundscapes have been found to negatively affect some species of wildlife, as well.
Motorized transportation noise has been found to
mask, or limit the perception, of acoustic signals
(Slabbekoorn and Ripmeester 2008). Acoustic masking has many important implications for wildlife,
such as prey location, predator avoidance and interspecies communication (Barber et al. 2010). Species
have responded in various ways to urban noise, such
as abandoning the area and making vocal adjustments
by shifting amplitude or frequency of their songs
(Patricelli and Blickley 2006; Slabbekoorn and
Ripmeester 2008). One study found that robins
changed their singing time to evenings when the city
was quieter (Fuller et al. 2007). Additionally, noisier
areas irrespective of habitat quality have been found
to have reduced bird density and diversity (Reinjen
et al. 1997; Stone 2000). Anthrophony in the
soundscape can also decrease the listening area for
species interfering with communication and predator

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1327–1344

1331

Natural Systems

Soundscape Patterns
Landscape Patterns

(Audible & Visual)

Behaviors
Research
Management
Land Use Change
Type of Recreation

Perceived
Characteristics

Human Systems

Values
Knowledge
Socio-Cultural System

Aesthetic Experience
Attitude Formation

Fig. 2 The connections between perceived soundscapes, their associated values, and human behaviors (after Gobster et al. 2007)
Table 1 Soundscape values and derived benefits of quality soundscapes
Soundscape values

Associated benefits from soundscapes

Human wellbeing

Improved human health and welfare, reduced stress, improved quality of life, and equitable access to quality
soundscapes

Wildlife wellbeing

Ability to hear predators, improved prey detection, improved vocalizing species communication, decreased
stress, reduced need for vocalization modifications

Sense of place

Cultural, historical, and natural locations convey unique sounds that meaningfully connect humans to that place

Landscape
interactions

Human expectations of the visual surroundings match the soundscape, increased aesthetic appreciation and
evaluation of place and experience

Ecological
integrity

Using soundscapes to monitor ecosystem function and sustainability, using biophony as an indicator of
biodiversity, using soundscape recordings to research effects of land use change

detection (Barber et al. 2010). Francis et al. (2011)
found that habitat occupancy and nest predation was
reduced in the gray flycatcher in areas containing
noisy gas well compressors. While the impacts of
noise are not the same for all species, the research
thus far indicates that soundscape quality is an
important consideration for wildlife conservation
and management.
Soundscapes and sense of place
Soundscapes have been referred to as an element of
sense of place (Schafer 1994; Fisher 1999). Sense of
place is defined as a collection of symbols, values,
feelings and meanings ascribed to a specific place
(Williams and Stewart 1998). Some researchers have
proposed that the construction of sense of place is

developed from place specific attributes emphasizing
the physical landscape features (Stedman 2003). In
recognition that the visual environment is not the
only thing influencing sense of place, others have
claimed soundscapes are an acoustic manifestation of
place (Fisher 1998). Fisher (1998) stated, ‘‘many
sounds of nature, e.g., the sounds of oceans or rivers
or the forest canopy or weather events vary significantly from place to place, from time to time, and
with each instance’’ (p. 168). Schafer recognized the
relationship between soundscapes and sense of place
stating, ‘‘every natural soundscape has its own
unique tones and often these are so original as to
constitute soundmarks’’ (1994, p. 26). Even our
home environment has sounds that we perceive to
create an acoustic sense of place (Westerkamp
2002).

123

1332

The human perception and emotional response to
an area are based on sensory inputs so both visual
(landscapes) and auditory (soundscapes) among the
other senses would interact to establish a sense of
place (Williams and Stewart 1998). Perceiving
soundscapes requires what Schafer calls being an
‘‘earwitness’’ or being aurally aware of the acoustic
environment (1994). Though, as Schafer (1994)
indicated, humans are increasingly disconnected with
their soundscapes. Low-fidelity (lo-fi) soundscapes,
often urban, are comprised of human-generated
sounds that mask other sounds. Frequently the urban
listener is unable to perceive low level sounds, distant
sounds, and is surrounded by so many sounds that
acoustic information is lost or ignored (Schafer 1994;
Wrightson 2000). In contrast, soundscapes that can be
clearly perceived and have low levels of noise are
referred to as high-fidelity (hi-fi) soundscapes (Schafer 1994). Hi-fi soundscapes allow individual sound
sources to be heard providing the listener with
information about their surroundings, such as distance from the sound source and connection to the
environment.
Most natural soundscapes are quintessentially hi-fi
in which humans can clearly perceive and connect
with natural sounds (Fisher 1999). Natural and rural
soundscapes are elicited often in writing to evoke a
sense of place (Leopold 1989; Schafer 1994; Olson
1997). Earwitness accounts in literature are evidence
of a human connection to place through the audible.
One earwitness example is from the narrative travels
of Alexander von Humboldt writing about a tropical
forest in Cuba:
when we lend an attentive ear to the most feeble
sounds transmitted through the air, we hear a
dull vibration, a continual murmur, a hum of
insects, filling, if we may use the expression, all
the lower strata of the air…These are so many
voices, proclaiming to us that all nature
breathes
(von Humboldt and Bonpland 1852, p. 199).
Another famous naturalist, E.O. Wilson, has indicated that this attention to nature elucidates values in
the natural world claiming that when we allow our
senses to experience nature, ‘‘even the small details
grow in significance’’ (Wilson 1984, p. 103).
Cultural and historical soundscapes are also valued
for creating a sense of place. Unique heritage sites

123

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1327–1344

reflecting historical and cultural places are impacted
by changes in the soundscape (O’Connor 2008).
O’Connor (2008) recognizes that aesthetic values
increasingly pressured and threatened by accelerated
social and physical change, so too are unique
soundscapes. Sounds and sound patterns define and
distinguish places from one another. Soundscapes in
Japan are viewed as a part of the country’s cultural
heritage. Japanese Environmental Protection Agency
developed a guidebook titled: 100 Soundscape of
Japan: Preserving Our Heritage (Torigoe 2003).
This effort was meant to raise awareness of and
preserve Japan’s natural and cultural soundscape
heritage. In terms of soundscape heritage and
conservation, there is a need to consider sound as a
positive or inherent factor of place-making.
Soundscape and landscape interactions
The associated connection between sense of place
and acoustics has been explored in two other fields:
landscape preference research and the emerging field
of acoustic ecology. Landscape research on preferences, values and planning traditionally has emphasized visual aesthetics and quality (Zube 1987;
Adams et al. 2006). As described earlier, soundscapes
can be considered auditory landscapes, in which the
listener evaluates and makes sense of the environment. As Farina and Belgrano (2006) indicate in their
eco-field hypothesis, acoustic cues are another layer
to understanding the landscape for auditory species.
The early and innovative work of Southworth (1969)
investigated the ‘‘sonic’’ environment of Boston. He
claimed that the city’s character and individuals’
perceived evaluation of the visual landscape could be
improved through changes to the soundscape.
Research on landscape perception and evaluation
has found that sounds influence the landscape values
(Mace et al. 1999). In fact, humans seem to have a
preference for the sounds of nature (Fisher 1999).
Several studies have compared urban and natural
settings and found that the preferred sounds in both of
these environments were natural sounds of birds and
water (Carles et al. 1999; Zhang and Kang 2007;
Irvine et al. 2009; Pilcher et al. 2009).
Initial valuation studies emphasized the sound
characteristics (e.g., decibel level, frequency, and
percent time audible) (Miller 2008). While it is
important to understand these components, studies

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1327–1344

have not been able to consistently correlate quality of
experience or annoyance with sound pressure level in
field studies (Kariel 1990; Tarrant 1995). The impact
of noise sources on visitors in natural settings has
found that loudness alone does not predict annoyance
(Kariel 1990). In fact, Kariel (1990) found that
mechanical or motorized noises at low decibel levels
could still be annoying and intrusive to people’s
experiences. Other factors might be better determinants for sound and landscape evaluations, such as
the appropriateness of the sound within the landscape
and individuals’ expectations and recreational goals
(Kariel 1990).
Recreation studies have documented that people
who seek out areas for natural quiet and solitude have
more negative experiences or increased annoyance
due to noise (Gramann 1999). For instance, wilderness recreationists have been found to be more
sensitive to aircraft noise than other types of recreationists (Tarrant 1995; Fidell et al. 1996). Overall,
mechanized or other noises that do not naturally
occur in a landscape can affect people’s experiences
and evaluations. The aesthetic appreciation of natural
sounds has implications for biodiversity and protected area conservation.
Soundscapes and ecological integrity
Acoustic monitoring has been used for identifying the
occurrence of individual species with better results
than other sampling methods (Acevedo and Villanueva-Rivera 2006; Celis-Murillo et al. 2009). Using
soundscape recordings to monitor biodiversity or
individual species, especially in the tropics, has
potential to improve efficiency and understanding of
wildlife. Some researchers have used the acoustic
signals from biophony to serve as a proxy for
biodiversity estimates (Reide 1993; Sueur et al.
2008; Pijanowski et al. 2011a). Assessing acoustic
diversity spatially and temporally can aid in conservation efforts for landscapes and biodiversity. Additionally, Pijanowski et al. (2011a) demonstrated that
acoustic diversity and temporal acoustic patterns of
soundscapes can be compared across multiple land use
types. The expectation that soundscapes acoustically
represent landscapes has led to the hypothesis that
soundscapes can offer insights into ecological quality
or integrity of an area (Krause 2002; Krause and Gage
2003; Pijanowski et al. 2011a). Soundscapes as

1333

indicators of environmental integrity can be applied
at a variety of spatial and temporal scales.
Our research on Tippecanoe Soundscapes (Pijanowski et al. 2011a; Villanueva-Rivera et al. 2011) has
focused on frequency band analysis of spectrograms.
Figure 3 demonstrates the use of acoustic gap analysis
based on the research in Tippecanoe County agricultural landscapes. Using this analysis, we found that
sounds in the 6–9 kHz range were absent in agricultural landscapes, representing a possible gap in
soundscapes that are normally occupied by certain
kinds of insects (e.g., cicadas, katydids). Using this or
other analyses, soundscape monitoring can serve as a
rapid bioassessment tool employed to detect shifts in
ecosystem function (Sueur et al. 2008; Pijanowski et al.
2011a).
Soundscape research is early in its development
and may have great potential for understanding the
world beyond just the visual interactions. While
valuing soundscapes for their research and monitoring benefits can promote soundscape conservation,
we hope that soundscape research and its clear links
to biodiversity and landscapes will be able to further
those conservation efforts, as well. In order to
advance soundscape conservation and soundscape
research, we propose the use of traditional conservation planning principles grounded in biodiversity
conservation and landscape ecology disciplines.

A soundscape conservation framework
for public lands
Traditional conservation planning principles
We argue that the conservation of soundscapes can
benefit by following basic principles being applied to
the conservation of biodiversity (e.g., Noss and
Cooperrider 1994; Soulé and Sanjayan 1998; van
Jaarsveld et al. 1998; Margules and Pressey 2000;
Groves et al. 2002; Brooks et al. 2006; Groom et al.
2006; Lindenmayer and Hunter 2010). Additionally,
we propose the following principles: consider managing soundscapes at landscape (e.g., Wiens 2009), and
potentially, at global scales (e.g., Whittaker et al.
2005; Turner et al. 2007), consider various ecological
and social values associated with different kinds of
soundscapes as discussed here (Gobster et al. 2007),
and be consistent with public area soundscape resource

123

1334

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1327–1344

Fig. 3 Assessment of frequency gaps at a location. Each
vertical bar represents the amount of sound occurring in a
15-min recording started at the beginning of each hour.
Approximately 3 days of recordings are represented here for an

agricultural landscape in Tippecanoe County, Indiana USA.
Note that gaps may occur at specific times of the day indicating
that an organism is missing. Gaps in the dawn or dusk chorus
may be especially important

management goals that are being proposed by natural
resource agencies, such as the NPS (NPS 2006).
Many conservation biologists recognize that several key elements are needed to protect and preserve
biodiversity. A first common step is to identify the
target for conservation (Groves et al. 2002). In
general, historically, this has included the need to
target certain ecosystems (e.g., tropics, savannas),
specific taxonomic groups, or species of a particular
status (e.g., endangered). Many conservation biologists recognize that surrogates (e.g., particular habitats) for these targets need to be assessed across large
regions, perhaps even globally. Soulé and Sanjayan
(1998), Margules and Pressey (2000), Groves et al.
(2002), among others, recognize establishing management goals or objectives for conservation as a key
element in any conservation planning process. Goals
need to be established so that they are measurable and
are responsive to policy actions. Assessment of
current areas for their ability to maintain targets,
especially those features which are being managed, is
also important (Groves et al. 2002). Assessment
needs to be long term and be constantly reviewed.
Pressey et al. (2003) argue that the ability to maintain
targets requires the identification of threats to the
persistence of targets long term and to develop
mitigating polices that reduce these threats. Finally,
monitoring programs are needed (Noss 1990; Margules and Pressey 2000) that ensure that goals are
being met and that adjustments in the management of
threats to targets are not needed. The basic conservation planning activities of defining targets, setting

goals, identifying and managing threats, and conducting continuous monitoring and assessment can be
applied to soundscape conservation as well.

123

Soundscapes worthy of protection
Specific management actions we are proposing depend
on the type of soundscape that needs to be protected.
Although more research is needed to create a comprehensive classification of soundscapes worthy of protection, eight different kinds of soundscapes are
presented here that we believe represent a breadth of
soundscapes that hold ecological and/or social value
(Table 2). The typology was derived using conservation biology concepts reflective of this ‘‘value-laden’’
science where soundscape types that have significant
value are identified (Groom et al. 2006). Some of the
types of soundscapes identified may need to be
protected from future threats or need to be restored
due to current impacts and degradation (Groom et al.
2006). Soundscape type values and additional reasons
for inclusion in this typology are provided in the
descriptions below and in Table 2. The soundscape
types and reasons for inclusion are not mutually
exclusive. In some cases the soundscape types could
be interrelated reflecting a mosaic of different landscapes and values. As soundscapes are linked to
landscapes, these soundscape types could be associated with public and/or private lands. Potential
conservation planning activities for each type of
soundscape and their associated landscape is provided
in Table 2.

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1327–1344

1335

Table 2 Soundscape types and conservation planning principles
Soundscape
type

Example(s)

Value(s)

Threat(s)

Management goals

Monitoring

Natural quiet
soundscapes

Remote areas in
parks, wilderness
areas, volcano
craters

Landscape
interactions,
experiencing
solitude, sense of
place, wildlife
wellbeing

Anthrophony and
biophonic invasive
species that are
loud

Monitor for changes
in ambient sound
levels

Sensitive
soundscapes

Bird breeding
habitats

Wildlife wellbeing,
ecological
integrity

Anthrophony and
biophonic invasive
species that mask
native sounds

Protect area from
human generated
noise, especially
low frequency
sounds that can
travel far or
dispersed
recreational noise
Protect area from
human generated
noise

Threatened
soundscapes

Predominately high
fidelity
soundscapes that
undergo increases
in anthrophony,
airport
development,
deforestation for
agriculture

Ecological integrity,
wildlife wellbeing,
human wellbeing

Excessive noise,
land use change

Mitigate excessive
noise, improve
technologies of
sound producing
object(s), limit
additional noise
intrusions

Monitor for
anthrophony and
biophony levels

Unique
soundscapes

Forest elephants in
Congo salt wetland

Wildlife wellbeing,
sense of place, loss
of these would be
irreplaceable,
global heritage
value

Loss of appropriate
habitat to generate
unique
characteristics of
soundscape,
human generated
noise, biophonic
invasive species

Identify unique
areas and establish
strict guidelines to
protect both
landscape and
soundscape from
alteration

Monitor for the
presence of the
unique sounds

Recreational
soundscapes

Northern Minnesota
lakes, off-road
vehicle use areas in
western rangelands

Landscape
interactions, sense
of place,
connecting
humans with
nature

Human generated
noise, loss of
landscapes that
create natural
sounds

Protect area from
activities that are
incompatible with
sounds created by
certain types
recreation

Monitor for specific
types of sounds
that are
recreational in
nature; protect
those landscapes
that support
organisms that
produce
soundmarks of
high recreational
value

Representative
soundscapes

Desert soundscape,
taiga soundscape,
grassland
soundscape, coral
reef soundscapes

Ecological integrity
and research,
global heritage—
preserve natural
soundscapes in
ecosystems around
the world, sense of
place

Loss of habitats/
ecosystems,
climate change

Protect soundscapes
from threats from
anthrophony and
biophonic
invasions, protect
landscapes from
land use changes

Monitor for selected
representative
soundscapes,
determine natural
ambient
composition of
these soundscapes
(frequency,
temporal patterns,
etc.)

Monitor for presence
of keynote sounds
that are critical to
ecosystem function

123

1336

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1327–1344

Table 2 continued
Soundscape
type

Example(s)

Value(s)

Threat(s)

Management goals

Monitoring

Cultural
soundscapes

City markets, church
bells in small town,
coastal areas with
foghorns

Sense of place,
cultural and
historic values
related to sounds

Loss of the sound
generating objects
(foghorns, church
bells), increase in
anthrophony

Recognize
culturally
identifying
sounds, identify
targets, maintain
high fidelity
soundscapes

Monitor culturally
significant
soundmarks and
associated
soundscapes

Everyday
soundscapes

Rural soundscapes
that contain typical
vocalizing
organisms such as
birds, amphibians
and insects

Human wellbeing,
sense of place

Low frequency
anthrophony, long
term increases in
the level and
occurrence of
anthrophony

Reduce identified
noise sources and
conduct acoustic
mapping and
qualitative
research to
identify issues and
targets

Monitor for
excessive sound
levels across
communities and
assess the presence
of biophony

City soundscapes

Natural quiet soundscapes
Natural quiet soundscapes are already recognized by
the NPS (1995) as soundscapes that need to be
protected. The NPS defines natural quiet as the
natural ambient sounds heard within a park unit (NPS
1995). These sound conditions are typically at very
low A-weighted decibel sound levels (dBA). For
instance, reported natural quiet conditions at parks
ranged from 40 to 10 dBA compared to suburban and
urban settings that can range from 40 to 80 dBA
respectively (NPS 1995). In some significant
instances the soundscape could have an absence of
human perceptible sounds, such as within a volcano
crater (NPS 1995). Natural quiet soundscapes can be
contrasted with naturally loud soundscapes, where
the ambient sound levels are higher due to increased
geophony or biophony. Unlike naturally loud soundscapes, natural quiet soundscapes are more sensitive
to impacts. Recognizing the impacts of anthrophony,
the European Union (2002) considers quiet soundscapes as those lacking noise from traffic, industry,
and recreational activities. Termed biophonic invasions by Pijanowski et al. (2011b), invasive or nonnative vocalizing wildlife species also can impact
soundscapes by masking native vocalizations or, as in
the case of the coqui frog (Eleutherodactylus coqui)
invasion in Hawaii, generate sound when there was
quiet (Raloff 2003).
As indicated previously, natural sounds are valued
by people and are important aspects of natural area

123

and wilderness experiences (Gramann 1999). Natural
quiet soundscapes are especially important for wildlife species that have evolved to communicate in
these acoustic environments. Monitoring for anthrophony and any increases in ambient sound levels
would be necessary. Given the continuous expansion
of roads into rural areas and the increase in number
and spatial extent overflights, these types of soundscapes are a conservation priority.
Sensitive soundscapes
Sensitive soundscapes are part of landscapes that
provide ecological or biological functions that could
be impacted due to anthrophony. A key example of
this is landscapes that provide habitat for threatened
or endangered species that rely on acoustic communication and cues. In these soundscapes any introduction of noise into the landscapes could negatively
impact the occurrence of natural sounds that are
important to the survival of the species. Depending
on the types of biodiversity supported in the area, the
overall ecosystem functioning could be impacted by
an increase in noise. Breeding habitats for endangered bird species that rely on acoustic communication would be an example of sensitive soundscapes.
Threatened soundscapes
Threatened soundscapes would be those that were
predominantly naturally quiet or high fidelity, but

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1327–1344

have undergone land use changes or have increased
anthrophony resulting in lower fidelity soundscapes.
These landscapes would be increasingly exposed to
high levels of sound that could negatively impact
ecological integrity. Land use and transportation
system changes can have a number of different
impacts on wildlife species and humans, as well. The
level of impairment for the threatened soundscapes
needs to be monitored for long-term temporal and
spatial impacts, as well as cumulative effects due to
habitat loss. For example, a new airport located near a
wildlife area could introduce noise levels that mask
animal communication necessary for breeding, while
also reducing available habitat that decreases biodiversity and biophony. Threatened soundscapes differ
from sensitive soundscapes in that the species
impacted by the acoustic changes are not necessarily
endangered; rather noise levels and soundscape
composition is such that natural sounds are interfered
with and natural biological activities could be
impacted. Research on threatened soundscapes can
provide additional insight into how ecological integrity is reflected in the soundscape for both wildlife
and humans.
Unique place-specific soundscapes
Every soundscape is indeed unique in that it is likely
that at any given location in the world, the composition and volume of sounds will differ from all
others. However, there are some soundscapes,
because of the unique composition of sounds or
volume (loud or almost silent), that should be
protected. The sounds of elephants bellowing in the
tropical rainforests surrounded by rock outcrops in
the Congo are unique; the reverberations created by
the surrounding landscape produce a soundscape that
is not likely to be found anywhere else. The sounds of
geysers erupting at Yellowstone National Park are
another example of a unique soundscape worthy of
protecting from noise intrusions. Unique place-specific soundscapes, if lost, could be irreplaceable.
Recreational soundscapes
Due to high recreational demand, some soundscapes
require special management consideration for conservation. Recreational soundscapes may include
areas that have natural ambient sounds reflective of

1337

the landscapes, such as waterfalls, wind through
grasslands, or unique animal calls (e.g., loons), but
also have moderate to high levels of recreational
activity. These soundscapes host sounds from human
motorized recreation activities, such as motorboats,
off-road vehicles, air tour overflights, or associated
recreation sounds, such as camp generators, vehicle
traffic, chainsaws, or music. While these areas might
currently be managed for multiple-uses, the loss of
natural sounds requires careful monitoring of these
soundscapes. Natural landscapes that become dominated by anthrophony should consider a revision of
management goals to incorporate soundscape targets.
Representative soundscapes
These are soundscapes that reflect or represent a suite
of landscape or ecosystem types. Representative
soundscapes can serve as indicators for ecosystem
and landscapes health, similar to indicator species
used for conservation efforts (Groom et al. 2006).
The biophony, geophony, and anthrophony of representative soundscapes can be researched and monitored for long-term temporal changes, such as
impacts due to climate change. Spatial variations
between landscape types and their soundscapes can
be compared to provide information on sensitivity
and resilience. Identifying areas with high ecological
integrity to serve as representative soundscapes will
be the most challenging, but landscape ecologists and
conservation biologists can provide candidate locations for acoustic recording. The additional benefit of
representative soundscape monitoring is that the
soundscapes of a suite of ecosystems will be recorded
for our global acoustic heritage.
Cultural soundscapes
Cultural soundscapes are socially defined soundscapes that have cultural, historical, spiritual, or
aesthetic values associated with them. These can be
natural or human dominated soundscapes. Generally,
cultural soundscapes are those that tie people strongly
to a place and that possess unique soundmarks. It has
been argued that identifying soundmarks can help
build community and preserve the natural and cultural
heritage that makes locations unique (Schafer 1994;
Torigoe 2003). Sounds of wind through unique
landscape features, the sounds emanating from

123

1338

historical battlefields during a reenactment, church
bells that sound across a valley, fog horns produced
along coastal areas, the sounds of a market in an urban
area all represent soundscapes that may hold special
cultural values for people (Schafer 1994). The greatest
threats to cultural soundscapes are their homogenization due to anthrophony and the loss of unique
soundmarks (Schafer 1994; Wrightson 2000).
Everyday soundscapes
Everyday soundscapes are those where we live, work,
and visit frequently. These soundscapes provide our
auditory link to the environment daily. For instance,
rural soundscapes that contain typical vocalizing
organisms such as birds, amphibians and insects at
audible levels provide the keynotes and rhythms that
residents have become customized to hearing (Schafer 1994). Special composition of dawn or dusk
chorus or nighttime sounds may be very important.
These soundscapes create a sense of place for people
that may not even be noticed consciously. The
management goal for everyday soundscapes is that
areas were humans spend most of their time need to
provide suitable acoustic conditions. A variety of
auditory and non-auditory health impacts result from
being exposed to certain sound levels (Staples 1996).
Perceived environmental quality and environmental
justice issues need to be taken into account for
managing everyday soundscapes. Threats to these
soundscapes include increasing amounts of noise and
the loss of specific habitats that might contribution to
the presence of biophony.
Soundscape-landscape conservation principles
The soundscape typology presented here is meant to
be a first attempt at classifying different soundscapes
to prioritize conservation and management. We fully
anticipate the typology will change as more research
linking soundscapes to social-ecological systems
emerges. The current version utilizes conservation
principles to identify potential goals. The conservation goals for most of the classified soundscape types
emphasize maintaining the natural composition of
sounds, both biophony and geophony. In some cases,
managing and protecting anthrophony is an important
goal, such as in some cultural and everyday soundscapes. Soundscape conservation has to be tied

123

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1327–1344

closely to the management of landscape as the
structure of habitats influence the presence and
abundance of vocal and stridulating organisms as
well as affect the propagation of sounds across the
soundscape (Pijanowski et al. 2011b, this issue).
Management of soundscapes might occur within
current protected areas, such as national parks and
reserves, but also in areas with private ownership of
land (e.g., everyday soundscapes). Regardless of
ownership, one challenge that soundscape conservation needs to address is the management of soundscapes at landscape or larger scales.
Whittaker et al. (2005), Turner et al. (2007),
Lindenmayer et al. (2008) and Wiens (2009) recognize the importance of considering ecosystem processes and human activities that occur at different
spatial scales that impact management outcomes
related to conservation. For example, Lindenmayer
et al. (2008) and Wiens (2009) argue that areas that
are under conservation management need not be
managed as ‘‘stand alone’’ spatial units as surrounding areas contribute to the flux of individuals or
species into and out of the conservation area. The
surrounding areas may also be a source of many
threats to the conservation area; these threats emerge
as a result of various human activities in these
surrounding areas. For instance, threats to park
soundscapes can include sound produced by humans
and the modification of the natural environment that
impacts sound production, transmission, and composition. Work by Lynch et al. (2011) has shown that
National Park soundscapes are under many threats
either through activities within parks (e.g., visitor
traffic and park infrastructure) or from sound production outside parks (e.g., overflights and road noise
from areas surrounding the park).
Soundscape conservation elucidates the importance of considering spatial scale by integrating
surrounding area planning as part of protected area
management, since the soundscape and its impacts
do not recognize boundaries. The landscape management approach, derived from landscape ecology
principles outlined by Wiens (2009) can be applied
to soundscapes. Figure 4 demonstrates that vocal
and stridulating organisms are likely to move in and
out of surrounding areas where there is likely to be
much greater human activities that threaten their
survival. Activities outside the conservation area that
may detrimentally impact biophony in the

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1327–1344

1339

Fig. 4 Landscape
perspectives of soundscape
conservation (after Wiens
2009) showing
a configuration of area of
conservation, sound
producing objects (e.g.,
roads, overflights),
surrounding areas,
importance of movement of
animals into and out of the
conservation area; b a road
noise profile that contains
the dB levels and associated
travel distances of road
noise for two hypothetical
critical thresholds and c the
road noise profile
superimposed on the map of
highway and conservation
area

conservation area include road noise from surrounding areas and noise from overflights (Fig. 4a). Many
activities occur in conservation areas, especially
national parks like those in the U.S. National Park
System (Miller 2008). Park visitor activities can
include motorized recreation vehicles or visitor
traffic on park roads. Factors that affect soundscapes
are likely to occur at multiple scales, frequently at
spatial extents larger than the conservation management unit.
In addition to spatial scales, temporal scales need
to be considered in the management goals of
soundscapes. Some soundscapes may need to be
protected on the basis of their time-sensitive nature.

Sensitive soundscapes are a key example of the need
for temporal considerations. Endangered wildlife
species that need to communicate at a particular
time of year or day would need to have soundscape
conservation measures in place to protect them.
Temporal soundscape conservation can take into
account rhythms that are important components of
soundscapes, such as the dawn and dusk periods for
birds to vocalize and announce territorial boundaries.
Soundscapes in the high-latitudes occur only over a
short period of time in the year. Still others might
need to be protected at night as opposed to during the
day as some nocturnal species might be sensitive to
noise. Many soundscapes types would benefit from

123

1340

management that considers time-critical periods
where threats might have the greatest impact.
Monitoring at various temporal and spatial scales
is a fundamental element of soundscape conservation.
As indicated in Table 2, monitoring could focus on
composition and/or sound levels depending upon the
type of soundscape. Composition could examine the
presence or absence of keynotes or soundmarks, the
complexity or diversity of sounds, or whether gaps
might exist (Fig. 3). Finally, research is needed that
attempts to identify unaltered soundscape composition and representative soundscapes. A theoretical
composition could be based on the knowledge of
species that are likely to occur in an area and their
acoustic niches (in sensu Krause 1987; Pijanowski
et al. 2011b, this issue). Representative soundscapes
used in long-term monitoring could also allow
conservationists to determine how relatively slow
long-term changes (e.g., climate change) might
impact species composition. Sound recordings may
also serve to preserve a record of biophony at a
location—an acoustic fossil if the soundscape is lost.
Soundscape values and land use planning
We identified many different values associated with
soundscapes and proposed a classification of soundscape types that highlight different values connected
with them. As we demonstrate in Fig. 2, soundscapes
are part of the perceived characteristics of the
environment that affect experience, form values,
and can lead to behavior change. Landscape ecologists have argued that the visual qualities of a
landscape are important and that perceptions can
relate to landscape values in the context of natural
resource management (Zube 1987; Nassauer 1992,
1995; Gobster 1999; Gobster et al. 2007; Ode et al.
2008, 2010). Nassauer (1992) and Nassauer and
Opdam (2008), among others, also have argued that
policy should consider landscape appearance because
people relate ecological quality to certain visual
characteristics of the land. Ode et al. (2008, 2010)
elaborated that visually complex landscapes are
perceived more positively than homogenous landscapes; complexity is an integration of several
landscape features including coherence, disturbance,
naturalness and ephemera. We have presented a case
that soundscapes, too, affect perceived environmental

123

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1327–1344

quality for humans and argue that they should be
considered in policies and management, as well.
Landscape design research, in particular urban
landscapes, has begun to address soundscapes as
elements of the perceived environment to manage.
Natural sounds, such as birds and running water, are
often evaluated as the most pleasant sounds in urban
areas (Zhang and Kang 2007; Irvine et al. 2009).
Incorporating additional green space to provide areas
for natural sounds in urban settings is a design
recommendation that links landscape features and the
soundscape (Irvine et al. 2009). In contrast to
regulating noise in terms of a strict reduction of
sound levels, soundscape conservation policy would
seek to protect unique, cultural, everyday, or
threatened soundscapes. Soundscape conservation
design and policy would manage those soundscapes
highlighting positive values and emphasizing high
fidelity soundscape quality. The perceived and valued
sounds of a city can be identified to enhance
landscape planning and soundscape conservation
efforts (Hedford and Berg 2003; Adams et al. 2006).
The values associated with natural sounds can
promote the conservation of many of the other
classified soundscapes types, such as natural quiet,
sensitive, unique, and recreational soundscapes.
Often the landscapes that are associated with these
soundscapes would be predominantly natural. Planning and conservation efforts could focus on maintaining soundscapes that reflect the landscape. Some
of these areas may already be protected as public
parks or other designations. As we mentioned previously, another important management principle is the
need to collaborate with natural resource agencies,
planning commissions, and other entities that are
interested in addressing soundscape conservation.
Researchers can advance soundscape conservation by
being consistent with soundscape conservation measures, classifications, and priority threats investigated
that align with the goals of planning or management
agencies working on soundscape issues. In the United
States, the NPS Natural Sounds Program has been
working on soundscape issues since 2000 with the
passage of the National Parks Air Tour Management
Act. Research projects and conservation goals for
areas surrounding NPS units could be designed in
consultation with the NPS to enhance soundscape
conservation efforts within and around the parks.

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1327–1344

Connecting humans with nature: an epilogue
Humans do not often see or realize the ecosystem
processes and functions that are occurring around
them. However, humans can hear natural sounds or
see landscapes as a way of experiencing nature.
Natural and unique soundscapes have a variety of
different values associated with them, but natural
systems need to be intact to have natural soundscapes.
More research is needed on the impacts to humans
and wildlife from homogenized and simplified
soundscapes. As Louv (2008) indicates, children
today are less exposed to nature and therefore
creating fewer connections with the natural world.
Yet, there is an innate attraction of humans to natural
sounds as evidenced in the multitude of values. Using
this perceptible link of humans to nature could add
value to conservation efforts, such as biodiversity
protection and protected area establishment.
Sounds engage one of the human senses that help
us experience the natural world. The recognized
values of natural soundscapes discussed in this paper
highlight a few motivations for their conservation.
Values surrounding soundscapes still need to be
better understood in order to develop appropriate
management actions.
Acknowledgments We
thank
Purdue
University’s
Department of Forestry and Natural Resources and the
Environmental Protection Agency’s Science to Achieve
Results Fellowship (STAR Fellowship #FP-91723901) for
their parts in funding this research. This publication has not
been formally reviewed by the EPA and the views reflected in
this paper are solely those of the authors.

References
Acevedo MA, Villanueva-Rivera LJ (2006) Using automated
digital recording systems as effective tools for the monitoring of birds and amphibians. Wildl Soc Bull
34:211–214
Adams M, Cox T, Moore G, Croxford B, Refaee M, Sharples S
(2006) Sustainable soundscapes: noise policy and urban
experience. Urban Stud 43:2385–2398
Ajzen I (1991) The theory of planned behavior. Organ Behav
Hum Decis Process 50:179–211
Barber JR, Crooks KR, Fristrup KM (2010) The costs of
chronic noise exposure for terrestrial organisms. Trends
Ecol Evol 25:180–189
Berglund B, Lindvall T, Schwela DH (1999) Guidelines for
community noise. World Health Organization, Geneva,
p 20

1341
Bowles A, Schulte-Fortkamp B (2008) Noise as an indicator of
quality of life: advances in measurement of noise and
noise effects on humans and animals in the environment.
Acoustics Today 4:35–39
Brainard J, Jones AP, Bateman IJ, Lovett AA (2004) Exposure
to environmental urban noise pollution in Birmingham,
UK. Urban Stud 41:2581–2600
Bronzaft AL, Ahern K, McGinn R, O’Connor J, Savino B
(1998) Aircraft noise: a potential hazard. Environ Behav
30:101–113
Brooks TM, Mittermeier RA, da Fonseca GAB, Gerlach J,
Hoffmann M, Maoreux JF, Mittermeier CG, Pilgrim JD,
Rodrigues ASL (2006) Global biodiversity conservation
priorities. Science 313:58–61
Carles JL, Barrio IL, deLucio JV (1999) Sound influence on
landscape values. Lands Urban Plan 43:191–200
Celis-Murillo A, Deppe JL, Allen MF (2009) Using soundscape recordings to estimate bird species abundance,
richness, and composition. J Field Ornithol 80:64–78
Chapin FS III, Wlaker BH, Hobbs RJ, Hooper DU, Lawton JH,
Sala OE, Tilman D (1997) Biotic control over the functioning of ecosystems. Science 277:500–504
Chapin FS III, Zavaleta ES, Eviner TV, Naylor RL, Vitousek
PM, Reynolds HL, Hooper DU, Lavorel S, Sala OE,
Hobbie SE, Mack MC, Diaz S (2000) Consequences of
changing biodiversity. Nature 405:234–242
European Union (2002) Directive 2002/49/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council: relating to the assessment
and management of environmental noise. Off J Eur
Commun 189:12–25
Evans GW, Maxwell L (1997) Chronic noise exposure and
reading deficits: the mediating effect of language acquisition. Environ Behav 29:638–656
Evans GW, Hygge S, Bullinger M (1995) Chronic noise
exposure and psychological stress. Psychol Sci 6:333–338
Farina A, Belgrano A (2006) The eco-field hypothesis: toward
a cognitive landscape. Landscape Ecol 21:5–17
Fidell S, Silvati L, Howe R, Pearsons KS, Tabachnick B,
Knopf RC, Gramann J, Buchanan T (1996) Effects of
aircraft overflights on wilderness recreationists. J Acoust
Soc Am 100(5):2909–2918
Fisher JA (1998) What the hills are alive with: in defense of the
sounds of nature. J Aesthet Art Critic 56:167–179
Fisher JA (1999) The value of natural sounds. J Aesthetic Educ
33:26–42
Francis CD, Paritsis J, Ortega CP, Cruz A (2011) Landscape
patterns of avian habitat use and nest success are affected
by chronic gas well compressor noise. Landscape Ecol.
doi:10.1007/s10980-011-9609-z
Fuller RA, Warren PH, Gaston KJ (2007) Daytime noise predicts nocturnal singing in urban robins. Biol Lett
3:368–370
Gobster PH (1999) An ecological aesthetic for forest landscape
management. Landscape J 18:54–64
Gobster PH, Nassauer JI, Daniel TC, Fry G (2007) The shared
landscape: what does aesthetics have to do with ecology?
Landscape Ecol 22:959–972
Gramann J (1999) The effect of mechanical noise and natural
sound on visitor experiences in units of the national park
system. Soc Sci Res Rev 1:1–16

123

1342
Groom M, Meffe GK, Carroll CR (2006) Conservation biology. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, MA
Groves CG, Kensen DB, Valutis LL, Redford KH, Shaffer ML,
Scott JM, Baumgartner JV, Higgins JV, Beck MW,
Anderson MG (2002) Planning for biodiversity conservation: putting conservation science into practice. Bioscience 52:499–512
Haines MM, Stansfeld SA, Head J, Job RFS (2002) Multilevel
modeling of aircraft noise on performance tests in schools
around Heathrow Airport London performance tests in
schools around Heathrow Airport London. J Epidemiol
Commun Health 56:139–144
Harmon D (2003) The source and significance of values in
protected areas. In: Harmon D, Putney AD (eds) The full
value of parks: from economics to the intangible. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc., Oxford, UK, pp 13–25
Harmon D, Putney AD (2003) The full value of parks: from
economics to the intangible. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc., Oxford, UK
Hedford P, Berg PG (2003) The soundscape of two landscape
settings: auditory concepts for physical planning and
design. Landscape Res 28:245–263
Hooper DU, Chapin FS III, Ewel JJ, Hector A, Inchausti P,
Lavorel S, Lawton JH, Lodge DM, Loreau M, Naeem S,
Schmid B, Setala H, Symstad S, Vandermeer J, Wardle
DA (2005) Effects of biodiversity on ecosystem functioning: a consensus of current knowledge. Ecol Monogr
75:3–35
Irvine KN, Devine-Wright P, Payne SR, Fuller RA, Painter B,
Gaston KJ (2009) Green space, soundscape and urban
sustainability: an interdisciplinary, empirical study. Local
Environ 14:155–172
Jensen M, Thompson H (2004) Natural sounds: an endangered
species. George Wright Forum 21:10–13
Kariel HG (1990) Factors affecting response to noise in outdoor recreational environments. Can Geographer
34:142–149
King EA, Murphy E, Rice HJ (2011) Implementation of the EU
environmental noise directive: lessons from the first phase
of strategic noise mapping and action planning in Ireland.
J Environ Manage 92:756–764
Kraft M (2007) Environmental policy and politics. Pearson
Education, Inc., New York
Krause B (1987) Bioacoustics, habitat ambiance in ecological
balance. Whole Earth Rev 57:14–18
Krause B (2002) Wild soundscapes: discovering the voice of
our natural world. Wilderness Press, Berkeley, CA
Krause B, Gage S (2003) Testing biophony as an indicator of
habitat fitness and dynamics SEKI natural soundscape
vital signs pilot program. Sequoia National Park, p 18
Leopold A (1989) A sand county almanac, and sketches here
and there. Oxford University Press, Inc., New York, NY
Lindenmayer D, Hunter M (2010) Some guiding concepts for
conservation biology. Conserv Biol 24:1459–1468
Lindenmayer D, Hobbs RJ, Montague-Drake R, Alexandra J,
Bennett A, Burgman M, Cale P, Cullen P, Driscoll D,
Fahrig L, Fisher J, Franklin J, Haila Y, Hunter M, Gibbons
P, Lake S, Luck G, MacGregor C, McIntyre S, MacNally
R, Manning A, Miller J, Mooney H, Noss R, Possingham
H, Saunders D, Schmiegelow F, Scott M, Simberloff D,
Sisk T, Tabor G, Walker B, Wiens J, Woinarski J,

123

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1327–1344
Zavaleta E (2008) A checklist for ecological management
of landscapes for conservation. Ecol Lett 11:78–91
Louv R (2008) Last child in the woods: saving our children
from nature-deficit disorder. Algonquin Books of Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC
Lynch E, Joyce D, Fristrup K (2011) An assessment of noise
audibility and sound levels in U.S. National Parks.
Landscape Ecol (Submitted)
Mace BL, Bell PA, Loomis RJ (1999) Aesthetic, affective, and
cognitive effects of noise on natural landscape assessment. Soc Nat Resour 12:225–242
Margules CR, Pressey RL (2000) Systemic conservation
planning. Nature 405:243–253
MEA (2005) (Millenium Ecosystem Assessment) Ecosystems
and human well-being: synthesis. Island Press, Washington, DC
Miller NP (2002) Transportation noise and recreational lands.
International Congress and Exposition on Noise Control
Engineering, Dearborn, MI, p 20
Miller NP (2008) U.S. national parks and management of park
soundscapes: a review. Appl Acoust 69:77–92
Nassauer JI (1992) The appearance of ecological systems as a
matter of policy. Landscape Ecol 6:239–250
Nassauer JI (1995) Culture and changing landscape structure.
Landscape Ecol 10:229–237
Nassauer JI, Opdam P (2008) Design in science: extending the
landscape ecology paradigm. Landscape Ecol 23:633–644
National Park Service (1995) Report on effects of aircraft
overflights on the National Park System. U.S. Department
of Interior, National Park Service, Denver, CO
National Park Service (2006) Management policies 2006. U.S.
Department of Interior, National Park Service, Washington, DC
Noss RF (1990) Indicators for monitoring biodiversity: a
hierarchical approach. Conserv Biol 4(4):355–364
Noss RF, Cooperrider A (1994) Saving nature’s legacy: protecting and restoring biodiversity. Island Press, Washington, DC
O’Connor P (2008) The sound of silence: valuing acoustics in
heritage conservation. Geogr Res 46:361–373
Ode A, Tveit MS, Fry G (2008) Capturing landscape visual
character using indicators: touching base with landscape
aesthetic theory. Landscape Res 33:89–117
Ode A, Hagerall CM, Sang N (2010) Analysing visual landscape complexity: theory and application. Landscape Res
35:111–131
Olson SF (1997) Listening point. University of Minnesota
Press, Minneapolis, MN
Passchier-Vermeer W, Passchier WF (2000) Noise exposure
and public health. Environ Health Persp Suppl
108(S1):123–131
Patricelli GL, Blickley JL (2006) Avian communication in
urban noise: causes and consequences of vocal adjustment. Auk 123:639–649
Perrings C, Naeem S, Ahrestani F, Bunker DE, Burkill P,
Caniani G, Elmqvist T, Ferrati R, Furhman J, Jaksic F,
Kawabata Z, Kinzig A, Mace GM, Milano F, Mooney H,
Prieur-Richard AH, Tschirhart J, Weisser W (2010)
Ecosystem services for 2020. Science 330(6002):323–324
Pheasant RJ, Fisher MN, Watts GR, Whitaker DJ, Horoshenkov KV (2010) The importance of auditory-visual

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1327–1344
interaction in the construction of ‘tranquil space’. J Environ Psychol 30:501–509
Pijanowski BC, Villanueva-Rivera LJ, Dumyahn S, Farina A,
Krause B, Napoletano BM, Gage SH, Pieretti N (2011a)
Soundscape ecology: the science of sound in the landscape. Bioscience 61(3):203–216
Pijanowski BC, Farina A, Krause B, Dumyuhn S, Gage SH
(2011b) What is soundscape ecology? Landscape Ecol.
doi:10.1007/s10980-011-9600-8
Pilcher E, Newman P, Manning R (2009) Understanding and
managing experiential aspects of soundscapes at Muir
Woods National Monument. Environ Manage 43:425–435
Pimm SL, Russell GJ, Gittleman JL, Brooks TM (1995) The
future of biodiversity. Science 269:347–350
Pressey RL, Cowling RM, Rouget M (2003) Formulating
conservation targets for biodiversity pattern and process in
the Cape Floristic Region, South Africa. Biol Conserv
112:99–127
Raloff J (2003) Hawaii’s hated frogs. Sci News 163:11–13
Rands RW, Adams WM, Bennun L, Butchart SHM, Clements
A, Coomes D, Entwistle A, Hidge I, Kapos V, Scharlemann JPW, Sutherland WJ, Bhaskar V (2010) Biodiversity conservation: challenges beyond 2010. Science
329(5997):1298–1303
Reide K (1993) Monitoring biodiversity: analysis of Amazonian rainforest sounds. Ambio 22:546–548
Reinjen R, Foppen R, Veenbaas G (1997) Disturbance by
traffic of breeding birds: evaluation of the effect and
consideration in planning and managing road corridors.
Biodivers Conserv 6:567–581
Rogers EM (2003) Diffusion of innovations. Free Press, New
York, NY
Rolston H III (1988) Environmental ethics: duties to and values
in the natural world. Temple University Press, Philadelphia, PA
Sagoff M (2004) Price, principle, and the environment. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK
Schafer RM (1994) The soundscape: our sonic environment and
the tuning of the world. Destiny Books, Rochester, VT
Slabbekoorn H, Ripmeester EAP (2008) Birdsong and
anthropogenic noise: implications and applications for
conservation. Mol Ecol 17:72–83
Sonyerd L (2004) Hearing as a way of dwelling: the active
sense-making of environmental risk and nuisance. Environ Plann D: Soc Space 22:737–753
Soulé ME (1985) What is conservation biology? Bioscience
35:727–734
Soulé ME, Sanjayan MA (1998) Conservation targets: do they
help? Science 279:2060–2061
Southworth M (1969) The sonic environment of cities. Environ
Behav 1:49–70
Stansfeld SA, Matheson MP (2003) Noise pollution: nonauditory effects on health. Br Med Bull 68:243–257
Staples SL (1996) Human response to environmental noise.
Am Psychol 51:143–150
Stedman RC (2003) Is it really just a social construction?: the
contribution of the physical environment to sense of place.
Soc Nat Resour 16:671–685
Steins NA, Edwards VM (1999) Platforms for collective action
in multiple-use common-pool resources. Agric Hum
Values 16:241–255

1343
Stone E (2000) Separating the noise from the noise: a finding in
support of the ‘‘niche hypothesis,’’ that birds are influenced by human-induced noise in natural habitats. Anthrozoos 13:225–231
Sueur J, Pavoine S, Hamerlynck O, Duvail S (2008) Rapid
acoustic survey for biodiversity appraisal. PLoS ONE
3:e4065
Sutherland WL, Adams WM, Aronson RB, Avelin R, Blackburn
TM, Broad S, Ceballos G, Côté IM, Cowling RM, da
Fonseca GAB, Dinerstein E, Ferraro PJ, Fleishman E,
Gascon C, Hunter M Jr, Hutton J, Kareiva P, Kuria A,
MacDonald DW, MacKinnon K, Madgwick FJ, Mascia
MB, McNeely J, Milner-Gulland EJ, Moon S, Morley CG,
Nelson S, Osborn D, Pai M, Parsons ECM, Peck LS,
Possingham H, Prior SV, Pullin AS, Rands MRW,
Ranganathan J, Redford KH, Rodriguez JP, Seymour F,
Sobel J, Sodhi NS, Stott A, Vance-Borland K, Watkinson
AR (2009) One hundred questions of importance to the
conservation of global biological diversity. Conserv Biol
23:557–567
Tarrant MA (1995) Factors affecting visitor evaluations of
aircraft overflights of wilderness areas. Soc Nat Resour
8:351–360
Thompson EH (2002) The soundscape of modernity: architectural acoustics and the culture of listening in America,
1900–1933. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA
Torigoe K (2003) Insights taken from three visited soundscapes
in Japan World Forum for Acoustic Ecology Symposium,
Melbourne, Australia
Truax B (1999) Handbook of acoustic ecology. Cambridge
Street Publishers, British Columbia, Canada
Turner WR, Brandon K, Brooks TM, Costanza R, da
Fonseca GAB, Protela R (2007) Global conservation of
biodiversity and ecosystem services. Bioscience 57:
868–879
UNEP, United Nations Environment Programme (1992) Convention on Biological Diversity. United Nations
van Jaarsveld AS, Freitag S, Chown SL, Muller C, Koch S,
Hull H, Bellamy C, Kruger M, Enrody-Tounga S, Mansell
MW, Scholtz CH (1998) Biodiversity assessment and
conservation strategies. Science 279:2106–2108
Vitousek PM, Mooney HA, Lubchenco J, Melillo JM (1997)
Human domination of Earth’s ecosystems. Science
277:494–499
Villanueva-Rivera LS, Pijanowski BC, Doucette JR (2011)
Sound 101: an introduction to acoustics for landscape
ecologists. Landscape Ecol. doi:10.1007/s10980-0119636-9
von Humboldt A, Bonpland A (1852) Personal narrative of
travels to the equinoctial regions of America, during the
years of 1799–1804. Henry G. Bohn, London
Westerkamp H (2002) Linking soundscape composition and
acoustic ecology. Organised Sound 7:51–56
Whittaker RJ, Araujo MB, Jepson P, Ladle RJ, Watson JEM,
Willis K (2005) Conservation biogeography: assessment
and prospect. Divers Distrib 11:3–23
Wiens JA (2009) Landscape ecology as a foundation for sustainable conservation. Landscape Ecol 24:1053–1065
Williams DR, Stewart SI (1998) Sense of place: an elusive
concept that is finding a home in ecosystem management.
J For 96:18–25

123

1344
Wilson EO (1984) Biophilia: the human bond with other species. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA
Wilson EO (1999) The diversity of life. W. W. Norton &
Company, Inc., New York, NY
Wrightson K (2000) An introduction to acoustic ecology.
Soundscape: J Acoustic Ecol 1:10–13

123

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1327–1344
Zhang M, Kang J (2007) Towards the evaluation, description,
and creation of soundscapes in urban open spaces. Environ Plann B: Plann Design 34:68–86
Zube EH (1987) Perceived land use patterns and landscape
values. Landscape Ecol 1:37–45

