IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS,

VOL. 20,

NO. 12 , DECEMBER 2014

1893

Visual Analytics for Comparison of Ocean Model Output with
Reference Data: Detecting and Analyzing Geophysical Processes
Using Clustering Ensembles
Patrick Köthur, Mike Sips, Henryk Dobslaw, and Doris Dransch
Abstract— Researchers assess the quality of an ocean model by comparing its output to that of a previous model version or to
observations. One objective of the comparison is to detect and to analyze differences and similarities between both data sets
regarding geophysical processes, such as particular ocean currents. This task involves the analysis of thousands or hundreds of
thousands of geographically referenced temporal proﬁles in the data. To cope with the amount of data, modelers combine aggregation
of temporal proﬁles to single statistical values with visual comparison. Although this strategy is based on experience and a wellgrounded body of expert knowledge, our discussions with domain experts have shown that it has two limitations: (1) using a single
statistical measure results in a rather limited scope of the comparison and in signiﬁcant loss of information, and (2) the decisions
modelers have to make in the process may lead to important aspects being overlooked.
In this article, we propose a Visual Analytics approach that broadens the scope of the analysis, reduces subjectivity, and facilitates
comparison of the two data sets. It comprises three steps: First, it allows modelers to consider many aspects of the temporal behavior
of geophysical processes by conducting multiple clusterings of the temporal proﬁles in each data set. Modelers can choose different
features describing the temporal behavior of relevant processes, clustering algorithms, and parameterizations. Second, our approach
consolidates the clusterings of one data set into a single clustering via a clustering ensembles approach. The consolidated clustering
presents an overview of the geospatial distribution of temporal behavior in a data set. Third, a visual interface allows modelers to
compare the two consolidated clusterings. It enables them to detect clusters of temporal proﬁles that represent geophysical processes
and to analyze differences and similarities between two data sets.
This work is the result of a close collaboration with ocean modelers. They employed our concept to ﬁnd aspects of improvement in a
new version of the Ocean Model for Circulation and Tides (OMCT).
Index Terms—Ocean modeling, model assessment, geospatial time series, cluster ensembles, visual comparison, visual analytics

1

I NTRODUCTION

Geoscientiﬁc simulation models, in particular ocean and climate system models, consider complex interactions between processes in the
Earth system [38]. For example, the salinity of the oceans affects the
circulation within oceans, which in turn impacts the energy exchange
between oceans and atmosphere. The latter inﬂuences air temperature,
which may affect continental and sea ice. To come full circle, melting
ice leads to freshwater inﬂux into the oceans which inﬂuences their
salinity.
Modeling such interactions serves three important purposes. First,
simulation models provide data about real-world phenomena in geographic regions that are not or only partially covered by monitoring
devices. Second, they enable scientists to identify and study causalities between geophysical processes to gain insight into the physics of
the Earth system. Last, when researchers have acquired a sound understanding of the mechanisms within the Earth system and their interactions, they can produce reliable predictions; a prominent example
being future greenhouse gas concentrations and their effect on, e.g.,
sea level rise, availability of fresh water, or natural hazards.
In this paper, we speciﬁcally focus on ocean models. Intense collaboration with ocean modelers at the German Research Center for Geosciences GFZ enabled us to gain an understanding of the challenges
involved in model assessment. The development of ocean models is
an iterative process in which the assessment of new model versions
• Patrick Köthur, Mike Sips, Henryk Dobslaw and Doris Dransch are with
GFZ German Research Centre for Geosciences, Potsdam, Germany.
E-mail: {koethurp, sips, dobslaw, dransch}@gfz-potsdam.de.
• Doris Dransch is also with Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Geography
Department, Berlin, Germany.
Manuscript received 31 Mar. 2014; accepted 1 Aug. 2014. D ate of
publication 11 Aug. 2014; date of current version 9 Nov. 2014.
For information on obtaining reprints of this article, please send
e-mail to: tvcg@computer.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TVCG.2014.2346751

is a critical part. After each change to the model, researchers compare the model output to reference data to determine whether the new
version improves the simulation. The reference data may either stem
from a previous version of the same model or from observations. The
latter is usually the case when a model is new and there is little knowledge about its behavior and performance against observations. The
former applies, e.g., when scientists want to improve speciﬁc aspects
of a tried-and-tested model and are already familiar with the observational data and the behavior of previous model versions.
For the comparison, modelers need to locate and compare geophysical processes in both data sets. In our context, a geophysical process
is a broad concept. It includes, e.g., the El Niño southern oscillation or
particular ocean currents such as western or eastern boundary currents.
Every process has particular temporal and geospatial characteristics
that manifest to a varying degree in the data.
To detect geophysical processes, our partners try to identify and
locate temporal proﬁles in the data that are characteristic for the processes under study. This is a challenging task due to the volume and
complexity of the data. Ocean models depict the ocean as a regularly structured three-dimensional grid. The grid points represent geographic coordinates and have temporal proﬁles associated with them
that describe the temporal behavior at these coordinates. For the analysis, modelers frequently focus on the topmost layer, the sea surface.
This is appropriate because most mechanisms within the ocean manifest themselves in changes to sea surface heights. But even with the
focus on the sea surface, the data comprise thousands or hundreds of
thousands of time series.
To address this challenge, scientists employ data aggregation and
visualization in a two-step process. First, modelers aggregate the time
dimension by computing a single statistical measure for each temporal
proﬁle in the data. Scientists plot this measure in a separate geographic
map for each data set to visually analyze and compare its geospatial
distribution. Second, modelers choose a small number of geographic
coordinates (typically not more than 20) for a more detailed analysis
of the temporal behavior. Line charts are used to study and compare

1077-2626 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1894

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS,

the temporal proﬁles associated with the selected coordinates.
Although scientists aggregate and compare the data based on experience and a well-grounded body of expert knowledge, they know that
data aggregation results in loss of information, and that the subjectivity involved in this strategy may have them miss important aspects.
The chosen statistical measure focusses the analysis on a particular
characteristic of temporal behavior; information about other aspects
of temporal behavior is lost. In addition, other important details may
not be noticed because modelers focus the comparison of temporal
proﬁles on a limited number of geographic coordinates.
In this article, we introduce a Visual Analytics approach that
presents modelers with a more comprehensive view on the temporal
behavior in the data. It allows modelers (a) to create multiple spatial
clusterings of the temporal proﬁles in model output and reference data,
(b) to consolidate the various clusterings for each data set with an ensemble approach [34], and (c) to interactively explore and compare the
two consolidation results.
We chose clustering of temporal proﬁles because (1) it allows modelers to systematically identify and locate the predominant types of
temporal behavior in the data, and (2) because it allows researchers
to base the analysis on many different characteristics of temporal behavior. Our concept enables scientists to compute multiple clusterings
with varying user-chosen features of temporal behavior, clustering algorithms, and parameterizations. In the following, a feature denotes
any representation of a temporal proﬁle that captures a particular aspect of temporal behavior and supports deﬁnition of a (dis)similarity
metric. To unite the different aspects of temporal behavior reﬂected in
various clusterings, a clustering ensemble combines all clusterings of
one data set into a single consolidated clustering. A visual interface
facilitates comparison of the two consolidation results for model data
and reference data. It allows researchers to identify clusters of temporal proﬁles that represent geophysical processes as well as to explore
differences and similarities between the two data sets.
In particular, the contributions of this article are as follows:
• We closely collaborated with ocean modelers and conducted a
thorough task and requirement analysis to identify the key challenges in the comparison of ocean model output with reference
data.
• We combine cluster ensembles and interactive visual exploration
for a novel approach to supporting the assessment of ocean models.
• We demonstrate how our concept enables modelers to conduct a
fast comparison of model data with reference data that complements the existing statistical methods.
2

R ELATED W ORK

Although numerous guidelines and techniques exist for the visual analysis of geospatial data [15, 30], time series data [2], and geospatiotemporal data [5, 7], the complexity and volume of geoscientiﬁc data
still presents signiﬁcant challenges [29]. Clustering is an established
technique for approaching these challenges. Its aim is to divide
data into groups of similar objects (for further reading, please refer
to [10, 20]). A number of Visual Analytics works apply clustering to
analyze geospatial time series. Andrienko et al. [4] introduce two perspectives to such an analysis: ‘space-in-time’ and ‘time-in-space’. The
former analyzes how the geospatial distribution of data values changes
over time; the latter studies how the temporal behavior is distributed in
geographic space. To address both perspectives, the before mentioned
work uses self-organizing maps (SOM) as a clustering and visualization technique and combines it with multiple linked views. In own
previous work [26], we consider the ‘space-in-time’ perspective and
combine hierarchical clustering with visual exploration to support detection of dominant spatial states in geoscientiﬁc data. Approaches
that apply clustering to analyze multiple temporal proﬁles ( ‘time-inspace’) are more numerous. Guo et al. [13] and Andrienko et al. [3]
use SOMs and combine them with geographic maps, small multiples,

VOL. 20,

NO. 12,

DECEMBER 2014

reorderable matrices, time series charts, or parallel coordinates. Another work by Andrienko et al. [6] combines clustering and interactive
visual analysis with the aim of statistical modeling of geospatial time
series. Woodring and Shen [40] combine wavelet transform, clustering, and interactive visualization for analysis of trends at varying temporal scales. These works use a single clustering, which captures only
a particular aspect in the data. A different clustering leads to different results. In our application, however, it is important to consider
multiple aspects of temporal behavior simultaneously.
Clustering ensembles [43] address this issue. They combine multiple clusterings into one clustering solution that shares as much information as possible with the input clusterings. With this approach one
is able to cluster the data with varying features. In addition, it eases the
burden on the users to ﬁnd an optimal combination of (dis)similarity
measure, algorithm, and parameterization of the clustering. They can
select a set of plausible conﬁgurations and use cluster ensembles to
combine the results. The resulting consolidated clustering is generally more robust and more accurate [18, 31, 34]. Although clustering
ensembles have been shown to improve data analysis in a variety of
ﬁelds – e.g., cancer research [22, 41] or remote sensing [42] – we are,
to the best of our knowledge, not aware of any works that apply this
approach and its beneﬁts to ocean modeling.
Another important aspect of our concept is the visual comparison
of model data with reference data. As noted in a recent survey [29],
many approaches for visualization and visual analysis in the Earth sciences have been introduced, but only a few works support the comparison of geoscientiﬁc simulation data. Nocke et al. [32] provide
a library of comparative visualization techniques tailored to climate
modeling. Based on the characteristics of the data and the task at
hand, their framework generates an appropriate visualization. Unger
et al. [39] address the validation of geoscientiﬁc simulation models.
They compare many model outputs with sparse and uncertain observations. The focus is to ﬁnd an appropriate model parameterization that
best matches the observations. Ahrens et al. [1] use comparative visualization to support detection of errors in simulation model code. To
this end, they conduct a numerical comparison of several output variables. Kehrer et al. [24, 25] and Ladtstädter et al. [27] support visual
analysis and comparison of different variables of climate model output by multiple linked views. Recent work by Poco et al. [33] focusses
on the comparison of output from different climate models. Their approach concentrates on the analysis of correlations between data sets.
These works do not base the comparison on geophysical processes, a
key requirement of our users.
The concept that is closely related to our application, focusing on
processes and applying clustering, was introduced by Frey et al. [19].
They support comparison of two temporal ﬁeld data sets by combining
automated detection of processes with interactive visual exploration.
For the detection of processes, they use recurrence analysis and clustering. This approach regards processes as recurring events and places
the emphasis on temporal similarity between data. In our application,
we do not focus on recurrences but are interested in geographic regions
that exhibit similar temporal behavior.
3 V ISUAL A NALYTICS A PPROACH AND R EQUIREMENTS
We adopted a user- and task-centered approach [14] in our collaboration with ocean modelers at the German Research Center for Geosciences GFZ. This involved frequent meetings and discussions with
our partners to obtain a detailed understanding of the model assessment process and the associated challenges. In this section, we provide
an overview of our concept and the associated requirements.
3.1 Objectives for a Visual Analytics Approach
As a result of our analysis we identiﬁed three main objectives for a
Visual Analytics approach to facilitate comparison of model data with
reference data.
(1) Less temporal aggregation Using a single statistical measure as a feature to describe a time series is a rather drastic approach
to temporal aggregation. The ability to employ other types of features,
such as the power spectrum of a time series, would reduce the amount

KÖTHUR ET AL.: VISUAL ANALYTICS FOR COMPARISON OF OCEAN MODEL OUTPUT WITH REFERENCE DATA

of information lost and allow modelers to study more sophisticated
characteristics of temporal behavior.
(2) More comprehensive comparison process The current
comparison process requires modelers to make two main decisions
that are rather subjective and may result in important aspects to remain hidden in the data. First, they have to choose a feature for temporal aggregation. A single feature, however, only describes a particular aspect of the temporal behavior. Other features may capture
different – but equally valid – aspects, and, hence, may yield different
results. Being able to consider various features of temporal behavior
in the comparison would broaden the scope of the analysis. Second,
modelers hand-pick geographic coordinates for detailed comparison of
temporal behavior. However, there is no guarantee that all relevant behavior can be observed at the selected coordinates. To reduce the risk
of overlooking important aspects, modelers need to take geographic
areas into account, not just a few coordinates.

1895

From a modeler’s perspective, the consolidation of clusterings
that are based on different features presents a more comprehensive, more robust view on the temporal behavior in a data set.
3. Interactive visual exploration and comparison of the consolidated clusterings.
An interactive visual interface allows modelers to study and compare the two consolidated clusterings of model data and reference
data. Scientists can perform visual queries to identify clusters
that represent geoscientiﬁc processes, and to explore differences
and similarities between the two data sets with respect to these
clusters. Furthermore, modelers can go back to the previous two
steps in the pipeline at any time. They can either choose to explore a differently conﬁgured consolidation result or they can
change the set of input clusterings to, e.g., consider additional
features of temporal behavior.

(3) Enhanced visual exploration and comparison When the
two objectives above are met, modelers will be able to study the output
of a model in comparison to reference data from a broader perspective.
To take full advantage of the additional information, scientists need a
Visual Analytics tool that supports the comparison from this broader
perspective. The tool should enable modelers to quickly identify and
inspect temporal proﬁles that point to relevant geophysical processes
in model data and reference data, and to assess differences and similarities between the data sets.

3.3 Requirements
In discussions with ocean modelers, we were able to identify four analytical requirements (ARs) and three visualization requirements (VRs)
for our concept.

3.2

AR1 Broad range of features
In order to detect different geophysical processes or to study various characteristics of a single process, the set of input clusterings must represent different kinds of temporal behavior. Therefore, modelers need to be able to choose from many features to
capture a wide variety of characteristics of temporal behavior
when computing the geospatial clusterings.
AR2 Many distinct cluster parameterizations
A parameterization of a clustering algorithm reﬂects a speciﬁc
assumption about the data to be clustered. However, modelers
can often only make vague assumptions about the temporal behavior in model and reference data. For example, although the
number of distinct types of temporal behavior in a data set can
usually be narrowed down to a plausible range, it is difﬁcult
to anticipate the exact number. To account for this challenge,
modelers need to be able to conduct clusterings with a varying
number of clusters.
AR3 Flexible conﬁguration of the consolidation
Modelers must consider two important aspects of a consolidated
clustering: the amount of information it shares with the set of input clusterings, the quality, and its number of clusters, the complexity. A consolidated clustering that shares little information
with the set of input clusterings is difﬁcult to interpret. Likewise, a large number of clusters also complicates interpretation
and comparison. To achieve a good balance between quality and
complexity, modelers need to be able to conﬁgure different consolidations with a varying number of clusters and to study and
compare the results.
AR4 Quantitative measures to support the assessment of consolidated
clusterings
When presented with a consolidated clustering, modelers want
to know how much information the individual clusters share
with the input clusterings. This enables them to discriminate
the clusters whose geographic locations were often considered
as similar in the input clusterings, from the clusters where the
input clusterings agree less on. This is important since the latter
may not allow for a meaningful interpretation. Furthermore, to
support an initial assessment of the relationships among clusters,
modelers need quantitative measures that describe the geospatial
similarity and the feature similarity between consolidation clusters.

Concept







	

	










	








	








	
	



	
	








	


Fig. 1. Our Visual Analytics concept: (1) modelers cluster model data
and reference data with multiple conﬁgurations, (2) each set of clusterings is combined into one consolidated clustering, and (3) modelers
interactively explore and compare the two consolidated clusterings. At
any time during the exploration, scientists can either change the conﬁguration of the consolidation or the set of input clusterings. Note that
the two data sets are considered independently in the clustering and
consolidation process.

Based on our analysis and the identiﬁed objectives, we developed a
threefold concept (Figure 1):
1. Computation of multiple geospatial clusterings.
Our concept allows modelers to widen the scope of the comparison by performing multiple clusterings of the temporal proﬁles
in model data and reference data. Since clustering considers the
entire geographic domain and systematically detects groups of
similar temporal proﬁles; modelers can compare geographic regions (the clusters) instead of a few geographic coordinates. For
the clusterings, scientists can choose from a broad range of features of temporal proﬁles, instead of just single statistical measures. This provides them with more options for the detection
of geophysical processes. The resulting two sets of clusterings
represent various perspectives on the temporal behavior in the
data.
2. Consolidation of the clusterings via clustering ensembles.
To enable modelers to compare model data and reference data
based on the two sets of clusterings, we combine each set into a
separate consolidated clustering using clustering ensembles [34].

3.3.1 Analytical Requirements
The analytical requirements comprise two requirements for the computation of multiple clusterings (AR1 and AR2), and two requirements
for the consolidation with clustering ensembles (AR3 and AR4).

1896

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS,

3.3.2 Visualization Requirements
VR1 Overview of consolidated clusterings
Modelers have to be able to interpret the results of the cluster
ensembles. Therefore, they need to obtain an overview of the
clusters and their relations in the two consolidated clusterings
for model data and reference data. This requires visualizations
that allow them (a) to ﬁlter the clusters that share only very little
information with the input clusterings, (b) to detect clusters in
each data set that may represent relevant geophysical processes,
and (c) to identify potential matches between clusters from different data sets to guide further comparison. This requirement
is associated with the following tasks:
•
•
•
•

Assess distribution of clusters in geographic space.
Obtain overview of geospatial similarity among clusters.
Obtain overview of feature similarity among clusters.
Compare individual clusters regarding the information
they share with the input clusterings.

VR2 Inspection of cluster properties
Modelers must understand the properties of a single consolidated cluster to judge whether it is related to a geophysical process. To this end, they need to:
• Assess the temporal variations of input time series associated with a cluster.
• Inspect the distributions of feature values associated with
a cluster.
• Inspect the distribution of cluster members in geographic
space.
• Explore relations between input time series, feature values, and geographic distribution.
VR3 Detailed comparison of clusters
For a judgement of model quality, modelers need to explore
and evaluate differences and similarities between consolidated
clusters in model data and reference data. This allows them to
identify geographic regions where the model performs well and
where it needs improvement. The associated tasks are:
• Compare the temporal variations of input time series associated with clusters.
• Compare the distributions of feature values for multiple
clusters.
• Compare the distribution of clusters in geographic space.
4 C LUSTERING AND C ONSOLIDATION
In this section, we describe the clustering and consolidation part of our
concept and how it meets the analytical requirements AR1-AR4.
4.1 Computation of Multiple Geospatial Clusterings
The computation of multiple geospatial clusterings has two aspects.
As explained in AR1 (Section 3.3.1), modelers need to be able to
cluster the data based on a variety of features. Therefore, our approach
provides many features describing aspects of temporal behavior that
scientists consider important for detecting geophysical processes; e.g.,
minimum and maximum value, mean, standard deviation, power spectrum, and logarithmic power spectrum. Note that scientists have the
choice to cluster the raw data without prior computation of features.
Scientists can also add additional features to focus on other types of
geophysical processes.
Secondly, modelers can create multiple clusterings by varying the
parameterizations of a clustering algorithm (AR2). The challenge in
our application scenario was to identify a clustering method that is appropriate for ocean model output and reference data. We conducted
a large number of experiments, clustering well understood observational data with different algorithms, parameterizations, features, and

VOL. 20,

NO. 12,

DECEMBER 2014

distance or similarity measures. The methods tested in these experiments were hierarchical clustering [23], DBSCAN [16] as a densitybased method, a Gaussian mixture model approach [17], and k-means
[8]. The clusterings were conducted with the following distance and
similarity measures: Euclidean, Manhattan, mutual information [12],
normalized compression distance [9], dissimilarity based on crosscorrelation [28], and dynamic time warping [11]. We chose k-means
and Euclidean distance because this combination yielded meaningful
clusters over a broad range of parameterizations and features. Note
that our concept is not limited to a speciﬁc clustering algorithm or distance measure. If need be, other methods can be included to provide
modelers with additional options.
To satisfy AR2, modelers can vary the number of clusters and the
number of iterations for the k-means algorithm. In addition, they can
choose a distance measure (with Euclidean as default).
4.2

Consolidation

We use the cluster ensembles framework of Strehl and Ghosh [34] to
combine the multiple clusterings into a single consolidated clustering.
This popular technique aims at ﬁnding a consolidated clustering that
maximizes the mutual information with a set of input clusterings. Mutual information is especially suited for our application because modelers are interested in the geographic regions where the input clusterings agree most on.
Since maximizing the mutual information is computationally prohibitive, we apply the three heuristics suggested in the cluster ensembles framework: the cluster-based similarity partitioning algorithm
(CSPA), the hypergraph partitioning algorithm (HGPA), and the metaclustering algorithm (MCLA). All heuristics ﬁrst transform the set of
input clusterings into a hypergraph. CSPA uses the relationships between objects expressed through the input clusterings to construct a
measure of pairwise similarity. This measure can then be used with
any similarity-based clustering algorithm (k-means in our case, see
Section 4.1). HGPA performs a minimum cut operation to approximately maximize the mutual information. MCLA uses the hypergraph
to identify and consolidate meta-clusters. Out of the consolidations
resulting from the three heuristics, the one that has the highest average
normalized mutual information (ANMI) with the input clusterings is
chosen (see [34] for further details).
While HGPA determines the optimum number of clusters automatically, the other two heuristics allow for controlling the ﬁnal number of
clusters. To provide modelers with the required ﬂexibility in the consolidation process (AR3), our tool enables them to apply MCLA and
CSPA for a varying number of ﬁnal clusters. They can then choose
to be presented with the best result in terms of information shared, or
select any of the other consolidated clusterings that were created by
the three heuristics.
4.3

Quantitative measures

To support the assessment of the consolidated clusterings (AR4) we
compute three quantitative measures.
The ﬁrst captures the information that a particular cluster in a consolidation result shares with the input clusterings. For its computation, we use the ANMI criterion from the cluster ensembles framework [34], but assume that the consolidated clustering only contains
this particular cluster. We call this measure marginal ANMI. It allows
modelers to identify clusters that should not be interpreted as geophysical processes.
We further compute the geospatial similarity as well as the feature
similarity between consolidated clusters. These similarity measures
are important criteria in the comparison of two data sets because they
allow modelers to identify pairs of clusters that represent the same geophysical process. For the pairwise geospatial similarity, we compute
the percentage of geographic overlap between clusters.
The pairwise feature similarity is determined as follows (assuming
that multiple feature spaces were used to produce the input clusterings): ﬁrst, we calculate the distance in each feature space between
the centroids of two consolidated clusters; second, we normalize the
separate distances, weigh and combine them. The weights for each

KÖTHUR ET AL.: VISUAL ANALYTICS FOR COMPARISON OF OCEAN MODEL OUTPUT WITH REFERENCE DATA

feature space are assigned according to the number of input clusterings that were conducted in the respective feature space. Hence, the
weights are implicitly provided by modelers since they create the set of
input clusterings for the consolidation. Lastly, we convert this single
distance measure into a similarity score.
5

I NTERACTIVE V ISUAL E XPLORATION

AND

C OMPARISON


	


	!!" '
)(

  



 	!!"
 $
 
 !  


 


	


 '
*(
 '
+(


&
!
 




&
 
 ! 




&
 


#
Fig. 2. The components and views of our visual interface, and the
visualization requirements and tasks they support. The consolidation
overview component comprises two views which support modelers to
obtain an overview of the consolidated clusterings. Based on this
overview, modelers select clusters for detailed inspection and comparison in the cluster details component.

To meet the visualization requirements outlined in Section 3.3.2,
our visual interface for exploration, interpretation, and comparison of
the consolidated clusterings comprises two types of coupled visualization components (Figure 2). A consolidation overview component
enables users to gain a basic understanding of relations among clusters
in geographic space and in feature space, and to decide on subsequent
analysis steps (VR1). Researchers select clusters in this component
and pass them to a cluster details component where they can inspect
the properties of a single cluster (VR2) but also compare multiple clusters in detail (VR3). Both components allow for visual queries to support the identiﬁed analysis tasks.
To establish a visual link, all clusters are color-coded consistently
across the consolidation overview and cluster detail components. To
this end, we use one of ColorBrewer’s qualitative color schemes [21]
as well as colors sampled from the CIELAB color space (see Guo et
al. [13] for a suitable sampling strategy). We chose the ColorBrewer
colors to provide users with carefully designed and easily distinguishable colors. If additional colors are required, we use the CIELAB
samples. This strategy yields a sufﬁcient number of distinguishable
colors. In addition, users can change the colors manually to adjust
the color coding according to their preference. Note that we assign a
unique color to clusters in both data sets since the consolidation process computes different clusters in both data sets.
The tight integration of the analytical part (clustering and consolidation via cluster ensembles) allows scientists to change the conﬁguration of the consolidation as well as the set of input clusterings. The

1897

former is done to improve the balance between quality and complexity of the consolidated clusterings (see AR3 in Section 3.3.1); the latter allows modelers to change the features considered in the analysis.
They can make these changes at any time during visual exploration
and study the resulting consolidated clusterings.
In the following, we explain the visual encoding and interactive capabilities of each visualization component, and how they contribute to
the visualization requirements VR1-VR3.
5.1 Consolidation Overview Component
This component provides an overview of the two consolidation results
(VR1) and, thus, acts as a starting point for the visual comparison
process. It includes two views: a geospatial overview and a similarity
overview (Figure 3).
5.1.1 Geospatial Overview
This view depicts the geospatial distribution of clusters in two maps;
one for each consolidated clustering. The maps are juxtaposed to allow
for visual comparison; cluster membership of geographic locations is
encoded with a unique color for each cluster.
The geospatial overview allows users to observe a variety of patterns. For example, the maps in Figure 3 depict clusters that form quite
coherent geospatial structures – e.g., the orange cluster in the model
data – but also clusters with members that are more distributed over geographic space – e.g., the yellow cluster in the reference data. Notice
also the different sizes of clusters as well as the horizontal structures
along the equator.
Modelers interpret these patterns based on their domain knowledge
and identify clusters that may represent geophysical processes. For example, the red cluster along the equator in the reference data probably
represents a process in the tropics.
5.1.2 Similarity Overview
This view provides quantitative information about the clusters and
their pairwise similarity (Figure 3) to support modelers to develop a
ﬁrst understanding of differences and similarities between model data
and reference data. For a compact visual overview, the clusters are arranged in a matrix layout. The rows represent the clusters from model
data; columns represent the clusters in the reference data. The clusters
are ordered with respect to their marginal ANMI score. Each matrix
cell contains a bar chart that depicts the geographic similarity and the
feature similarity (see Section 4.3) between a pair of clusters. This
enables modelers to quickly detect similar clusters.
The similarity overview also allows modelers to assess the clusters
regarding the information they share with the input clusterings. For
this purpose, we visualize the marginal ANMI (see Section 4.3) for
each cluster as colored bars next to the cluster labels in the row and
column headers. We arrange the ANMI bars in this way to facilitate comparison of clusters by judging position along a common scale.
Since users were primarily interested in a relative comparison of clusters, the bars are scaled to the highest marginal ANMI score among all
clusters. In addition, the bars are labeled with their ANMI values to
help users judge the absolute amount of information shared with input
clusterings.
5.1.3 Linking and Interaction
To support modelers in the assessment of relations among clusters, the
similarity overview offers several ﬁltering and sorting options.
In order to allow scientists to focus on a particular aspect of cluster
similarity, we provide a checkbox tree (Figure 3) where they can select
between displaying information on geospatial similarity, feature similarity, or both. They can further select the features to be considered in
the computation of the feature similarity.
To obtain a better overview of similarities between clusters, modelers can also change the order of clusters in the matrix by mouseclicking on a cluster label. When users click on a row label, the clusters in the columns are sorted in order of decreasing geospatial or feature similarity to the selected cluster, and vice versa. Users may switch
the sorting criterion any time during analysis.

1898

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS,

(A) Geospatial overview

VOL. 20,

NO. 12,

DECEMBER 2014

(B) Similarity overview

Reference data
Model data

Model data

choice of similarity
criteria to display
in matrix

Reference data

marginal
ANMIs

filtering of clusters
similarity between clusters

Fig. 3. The consolidation overview component. Note that each cluster has its unique color since the cluster ensemble computes different clusters
in both data sets. The consolidation overview supports scientists to focus on clusters that allow for a meaningful interpretation and to understand
the relationships between clusters by comparing their geospatial and feature similarity.

Lastly, checkboxes adjacent to the marginal ANMI bars allow modelers to visually ﬁlter clusters that they consider irrelevant or that share
very little information with the input clusterings. Deselected clusters
are greyed out in the similarity overview as well as in the geospatial
overview.
An important functionality of the consolidation overview component is to enable users to choose and pass clusters to cluster details
views for detailed inspection and comparison. To this end, modelers
may either use the geospatial overview or the similarity view. In the
geospatial overview, they may click on one of the maps to select a
cluster and pass it to a cluster details view. In the similarity overview,
modelers can click on a matrix cell to compare the two clusters associated with that cell in a new cluster details view.
5.2

Cluster Details Component

This visualization component allows modelers to inspect the properties of a single cluster (VR2) to determine whether it represents a geophysical process. It also enables them to compare multiple clusters
in detail (VR3) to study differences and similarity between clusters in
model and reference data.
A cluster details component comprises three visualizations (Figure 4a). The time series view depicts the temporal signatures associated with clusters, the feature distribution view helps users to inspect
and compare the distribution of feature values for each cluster, and
a geospatial distribution view facilitates detailed inspection and comparison of clusters in geographic space. All three views are tightlycoupled and allow users to conduct visual queries to the consolidation
results via linking and brushing.
5.2.1

Time Series View

This view presents the time series of the cluster centroid – which is the
average time series over all cluster members – in a line chart. To assess the range of temporal variations in clusters, modelers can choose
to display a semi-transparent minimum-maximum ribbon around each
cluster representative (Figure 4b). The colors of the semi-transparent
ribbons from different clusters mix in areas of overlap. This allows
users to visually compare the temporal variations of multiple clusters.
The time series view also enables users to interactively change the time
frame via zooming to focus on particular time periods of interest.

5.2.2

Feature Distribution View

This view supports inspection and comparison of clusters regarding
their distributions of feature values. Each feature is depicted in a separate visualization to reduce visual complexity. In accordance with
the preference of our collaborators, we use line charts for features like
the power spectrum of a temporal proﬁle, and box-and-whisker plots
for scalar features such as standard deviation. These two visualization types are appropriate for all features that our partners use for their
analyses. To accommodate other types of features, this view can be
easily extended to include additional visualizations such as star plots,
3D charts, or scatterplot.
The line charts are constructed in the same way as the time series
view; cluster representatives are shown and optionally surrounded by
a semi-transparent minimum-maximum ribbon (Figure 4b).
Box-and-whisker plots communicate comprehensive information
about the distribution of feature values in clusters. Furthermore, juxtaposing box-and-whisker items from different clusters allows users to
judge position along a common scale and, thus, facilitates comparison.
5.2.3

Geospatial Distribution View

In this visualization, all clusters in the cluster details component are
plotted in the same geographic space to facilitate detailed comparison of clusters from different consolidated clusterings. Areas where
clusters overlap are highlighted to point researchers to similarities in
geographic space (black areas in geospatial distribution views in Figure 4). This view also shows the total percentage of overlap between
all selected clusters as quantitative information above the plotting area.
5.2.4

Linking and Interaction

The cluster details component provides several means of interaction to
support inspection and comparison of clusters.
Apart from tooltips and zooming functionality, users can ﬁlter the
clusters in this component using checkboxes at the top. This enables
modelers to reduce visual complexity, for example, to focus on varying
pairwise comparisons, to revisit the properties of a single cluster, or to
assess how much a particular cluster contributes to the total geospatial
overlap.
To allow modelers to explore relations between input time series,
feature values, and geographic distribution of clusters, this visualization component offers three brushing mechanisms. First, researchers
can brush a range of feature values in a box-and-whisker plot. The

KÖTHUR ET AL.: VISUAL ANALYTICS FOR COMPARISON OF OCEAN MODEL OUTPUT WITH REFERENCE DATA

(A) Time series view

(B) Feature distribution view

(C) Geospatial distribution view

of model output only requires to analyze the topmost layer, the sea
surface, since most mechanisms within the ocean manifest themselves
in changes to sea surface heights.
The most important ocean processes to consider during the assessment of OMCT data are the western boundary currents (WBC) and the
antarctic circumpolar current (ACC). These ocean currents cause high
spatial and temporal variability of sea surface heights around Antarctica, South Africa and on the northwest-side of the Atlantic and Paciﬁc
Ocean basins.
The remainder of this section describes how our tool supported the
assessment of a new version of the OMCT (OMCTnew ) regarding its
ability to depict WBC and ACC processes.
6.1

(b) Cluster details component with semi-transparent minimum-maximum
range ribbons in line charts.
Fig. 4. The cluster details component.

distributions of all cluster members that fall within the selected range
are highlighted in the other plots in the cluster details component. Second, modelers may apply a vertical line brush in a line chart to determine all cluster members with values in the selected y-axis range at
the speciﬁed x-axis index. Again, the corresponding distributions are
highlighted in the other visualizations. Third, modelers can select either all overlapping or all non-overlapping geographic locations in the
geospatial distribution view to study the distributions of features for
these regions in the other views.
A PPLICATION E XAMPLE :
TION AND T IDES

O CEAN M ODEL

FOR

Results

To asses the OMCTnew , modelers compared sea-level anomalies simulated with this version with data produced by the current state-of-theart OMCT version (OMCTcurrent ). Each data set comprised approximately 9000 time series.
Applying our approach to the comparison of the two OMCT versions allowed for three important accomplishments: (1) the consolidation enabled modelers to capture the WBC and ACC processes in both
data sets, (2) the visual interface permitted modelers to readily identify the clusters that represent these processes and to study relations
between these clusters across data sets, and (3) detailed visual comparison helped them two determine that the OMCTnew signiﬁcantly
improves the state-of-the-art OMCT version.
In the following, we provide more details about each of these three
accomplishments.

(a) The three views of a cluster details component.

6

1899

C IRCULA -

In this section, we explain how our approach supported the assessment
of the Ocean Model for Circulation and Tides (OMCT) [36]. On the
domain expert side of our collaboration in this particular example were
two ocean modelers, one of them a leading OMCT expert and also coauthor of this paper.
The OMCT simulates currents and tides of the global ocean and is
used for removal of aliasing artifacts from observational data produced
by the Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE) satellite
mission [35]. GRACE data are used in the geosciences to gain valuable
insight into a number of important processes on Earth, e.g., ice-mass
changes, ocean tides, or Earth crust displacements associated with major earthquakes. To ensure a high quality of these widely used data,
noise correction with models such as the OMCT is crucial.
The OMCT yields volumetric time series data, representing the
ocean as 13 vertical depth layers of regular horizontal grids. Although
the data comprise three geographic dimensions, an initial assessment

(1) Capturing WBC and ACC processes. To describe WBC
and ACC, modelers chose standard deviation, minimum and maximum, and the logarithmic power spectrum as features. These features
describe the variation in a temporal proﬁle from varying angles and in
different granularities. Standard deviation summarizes the variability
in a temporal proﬁle in a single scalar value. The minimum-maximum
feature is a vector of size two that provides information about the range
of values that can be found in a temporal proﬁle. The logarithmic
power spectrum is a vector of size n/2 − 1 where n is the length of a
time series. It provides detailed information about the energy that a
temporal proﬁle exhibits at particular frequencies. Out of these three
features, modelers previously could only use standard deviation to capture the variability of temporal proﬁles and to compare them in geographic space. Likewise, the power spectrum could only be used for
detailed comparison of temporal proﬁles at a few geographic coordinates. Our Visual Analytics approach allows modelers to use all three
features to compare the temporal proﬁles at all geographic coordinates.
Our collaborators concluded that WBC and ACC processes can be
differentiated into at least two but not more than twelve different types.
Therefore, they chose k-means clustering for each of the three features
with k ranging from two to twelve as input for the consolidation. This
resulted in 33 input clusterings for each data set. Modelers also set the
number of clusters for the consolidated clusterings to range from two
to twelve. The consolidated clusterings with twelve clusters shared the
most information with the sets of input clusterings. However, modelers determined with our tool that the results with only seven clusters
had a much better balance between quality and complexity. In particular, the number of clusters was reduced by 40%, while the information shared with the input clusterings decreased by only 0.2% for
OMCTcurrent and 4% for OMCTnew .
(2) Identifying WBC/ACC clusters in both data sets. First, the
geospatial overview in our tool allowed modelers to scan the consolidated clusterings for clusters that represent WBC and ACC processes
(Figure 5a left). Based on their knowledge about the geospatial distribution of WBC/ACC and the geospatial shapes of the clusters, modelers quickly identiﬁed the dark blue cluster in the OMCTcurrent data
and the red cluster in the OMCTnew as candidates.
Next, modelers were able to discern from the marginal ANMI
scores in the similarity overview (Figure 5a right) that these two
clusters share signiﬁcant information with the input clusterings, and,

1900

OMCTcurrent

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS,

Geospatial overview

OMCTcurrent

WBC/ACC
processes

NO. 12,

DECEMBER 2014

Similarity overview
highest
marginal ANMI
among all
clusters

OMCTnew

VOL. 20,

OMCTnew

high spatial
overlap and
feature similarity

(a) Consolidation overview showing consolidated clusterings for OMCTcurrent (upper left) and OMCTnew (lower left). The dark blue cluster and the red cluster
represent western boundary currents and antarctic circumpolar currents. The similarity overview indicates that both clusters share a relatively high amount of
information with the input clusterings and have high spatial overlap and feature similarity.

6) smaller amplitudes
in OMCTnew

7) more energy at
low frequencies
in OMCTnew
8) less energy at
high frequencies
in OMCTnew

4) more accurate
Gulf stream region

5) less extreme
minimum, maximum,
and
standard deviation
in OMCTnew

2) more zonal
structure in OMCTnew

3) Mediterranean
Sea not represented
in OMCTnew

1) more detailed
representation in OMCTnew

(b) Cluster details component comparing WBC/ACC clusters from OMCTcurrent (dark blue) and OMCTnew (red). OMCTnew improves the simulation in various
aspects. The red OMCTnew cluster is a more accurate geographic representation of WBC/ACC processes (1-4), it also exhibits less extreme temporal behavior (5,
6), as well as an improved power spectrum (7, 8).
Fig. 5. Comparison of a new version of the Ocean Model for Circulation and Tides (OMCT) – OMCTnew – with the current state-of-the-art OMCT
version – OMCTcurrent .

KÖTHUR ET AL.: VISUAL ANALYTICS FOR COMPARISON OF OCEAN MODEL OUTPUT WITH REFERENCE DATA

hence, can be interpreted as geophysical processes. Of all clusters in
the two data sets, the dark blue WBC/ACC cluster had the highest
marginal ANMI, while the score for the red cluster was also relatively
high. Modelers could also tell from the similarity overview that the
two clusters have high geospatial and feature similarity and, thus, represent the same geophysical process.
(3) Detailed comparison of model versions. In developing a
new model version, ocean modelers wanted to improve a number of
aspects of the current state-of-the-art OMCT version (OMCTcurrent ):
(a) more detailed simulation of WBC and ACC regions, (b) improved
simulation of WBC in the Gulf stream region, (c) smaller amplitudes
in sea-surface heights over time, and (d) more energy for low frequencies and less energy for high frequencies in the power spectra of temporal proﬁles.
Exploring the two WBC/ACC clusters in a cluster details component (Figure 5b) allowed for assessing all of these aspects. The geospatial distribution view enabled modelers to notice four geographic characteristics that have improved with the new model version: (1) the
region west of South Africa (lower right overlap) is represented in
much more detail, (2) the WBC region in the northwest Paciﬁc (top
middle overlap region) is simulated in a more zonal structure, (3) the
Mediterranean Sea is not represented in the red OMCTnew cluster, and
(4) the Gulf stream region is also represented more accurately in the
OMCTnew cluster. In sum, modelers concluded from the geospatial
distribution view that the new model version provides a more accurate
geographic representation of WBC and ACC processes.
In addition, the time series view and the feature distribution view
show that the red OMCTnew cluster exhibits less extreme temporal behavior with smaller amplitudes. Lastly, a comparison of the logarithmic power spectra (Figure 5b) reveals that the ﬁnal objective has also
been met. In comparison to the OMCTcurrent cluster, the OMCTnew
cluster has more energy at low frequencies and less energy in higher
frequencies.
All the above ﬁndings constitute aspects of potential improvement
in the new version of the OMCT – aspects that our partners could
readily study with the help of our approach. After additional statistical
analyses to corroborate the increase in quality, the OMCTnew became
the new state-of-the-art OMCT version.
6.2 User Feedback
Our partners consider our approach a valuable complement to their
existing tools and routine for four primary reasons: (1) they are not
limited any more to single statistical measures for the detection of
geophysical processes, instead, they have access to a range of features of temporal behavior, (2) the combination of multiple clusterings
and cluster ensembles improves the detection of geophysical processes
because multiple features of temporal behavior are considered simultaneously, (3) our interactive tool enables modelers to obtain a more
complete picture about differences and similarities between model and
reference data, and (4) it has great potential for speeding up the model
development process because it supports a quick initial assessment of
new model versions.
Our partners also value the ﬂexibility of our approach. Our tool can
be extended to include any feature that describes the temporal behavior
represented in a temporal proﬁle and, hence, allows scientists to study
any geophysical process that may be of relevance to the assessment.
Modelers are also highly ﬂexible regarding the visual exploration. Although the consolidation overview component provides them with important information that guides subsequent analysis steps, they can always decide to make an educated guess and readily study any potentially interesting aspect. Before they had our tool, such an educated
guess was not feasible because it involved time-consuming scripting
and plotting procedures, a problem that also exists in related domains
such as climate research [33, 37]. The means of interaction provided
in our tool effectively remove this hurdle.
6.3 Discussion
Although our concept provides signiﬁcant beneﬁts to modelers in the
assessment of ocean models, several issues need to be discussed.

1901

First, the quality of the input clusterings determines the quality of
the consolidated clusterings. Therefore, the features chosen for the
clusterings must capture geophysical processes. If not, the consolidation will not yield meaningful clusters. However, since our approach
was developed with and for expert users, one can assume that the features chosen will be appropriate for the respective analysis task.
Second, the computational complexity of the consolidation process
is quadratic in the number of temporal proﬁles in a data set. Although
this can be addressed in future work, it has not been a major issue
in our application for two reasons. (1) A single simulation run of an
ocean model typically takes several days if not weeks; in this context,
the required time for the consolidation process is negligible. (2) In
the opinion of modelers, the beneﬁts of our approach outweigh the
downside of the high computational complexity. Depending on the
hardware available, the automated analysis part of our approach is applicable to models in the range of 100K grid points.
Another point worth mentioning is that the time series view is currently limited to a reasonable number of time steps in the temporal
proﬁles. In practice, however, this was no issue because ocean modelers typically study weekly, monthly, or even seasonal averages. This
approach is also applied by climate scientists (as described by Poco et
al. [33]) and signiﬁcantly reduces the number of time steps per year.
7

C ONCLUSION

AND

F UTURE W ORK

In this article, we presented a Visual Analytics concept that addresses
a crucial part in ocean modeling: the comparison of model output with
reference data. This concept was developed in close collaboration with
ocean modelers, which allowed us to identify the primary challenges:
the drastic aggregation that had to be performed and the high degree
of subjectivity in the comparison process. To address these challenges
we integrate clustering ensembles and interactive visual analysis into
a tightly-coupled system. This approach is based on a comprehensive
task and requirement analysis.
We have shown that the combination of data mining and interactive
visual analysis can be of high value to the assessment of ocean models.
We could also observe in our collaboration that the promising results
of our work have led to increasing acceptance of Visual Analytics in
the ocean modeling community.
To further enhance our approach, we identiﬁed several major areas
of future work. The next step is to conduct an in-depth user study to
further corroborate the promising results we were able to achieve so
far. We also want to extend our concept to very high-resolution ocean
models, which requires improving the scalability of the visualization
components as well as reducing the time and storage complexity of
the consolidation. Therefore, we would like to investigate the applicability of distributed computing and GPU processing to our concept.
We also plan on working on efﬁcient algorithms to further speed up
the consolidation and to better adapt to the characteristics of ocean
model data. Currently, our concept supports the analysis of sea surface heights or any other meaningful two-dimensional layer. To apply
our approach to all three geospatial dimensions, we will, again, have to
address the scalability of the automated analysis, but in addition, identify and meet the visualization requirements that come with the third
spatial dimension. We would also like to extend our approach from a
two-way comparison to a three-way comparison. This would support
an even more comprehensive assessment. A three-way comparison,
however, also introduces additional challenges for Visual Analytics.
Finally, our vision is to incorporate other types of geoscientiﬁc simulation models, beginning with climate models since their characteristics
are somewhat similar to ocean models.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Joachim Fohringer, Ralf Friedeman, and Alexander
Bobach for their help in implementing the prototype. This study was
partially supported by the German Federal Ministry for Education and
Research (BMBF) via the Potsdam Research Cluster for Georisk Analysis, Environmental Change and Sustainability (PROGRESS) (grant
number 03IS2191A).

1902

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS,

R EFERENCES
[1] J. Ahrens, K. Heitmann, M. Petersen, J. Woodring, S. Williams, P. Fasel,
C. Ahrens, C.-H. Hsu, and B. Geveci. Verifying scientiﬁc simulations
via comparative and quantitative visualization. IEEE Computer Graphics
and Applications, 30(6):16–28, 2010.
[2] W. Aigner, S. Miksch, H. Schumann, and C. Tominski. Visualization of
time-oriented data. Springer, 2011.
[3] G. Andrienko, N. Andrienko, P. Bak, S. Bremm, D. Keim, T. von Landesberger, C. Pölitz, and T. Schreck. A framework for using self-organising
maps to analyse spatio-temporal patterns, exempliﬁed by analysis of mobile phone usage. Journal of Location Based Services, 4(3–4):200–221,
2010.
[4] G. Andrienko, N. Andrienko, S. Bremm, T. Schreck, T. Von Landesberger, P. Bak, and D. Keim. Space-in-time and time-in-space selforganizing maps for exploring spatiotemporal patterns. Computer Graphics Forum, 29(3):913–922, 2010.
[5] N. Andrienko and G. Andrienko. Exploratory analysis of spatial and
temporal data. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2006.
[6] N. Andrienko and G. Andrienko. A visual analytics framework for spatiotemporal analysis and modelling. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 27(1):55–83, 2013.
[7] N. Andrienko, G. Andrienko, and P. Gatalsky. Exploratory spatiotemporal visualization: an analytical review. Journal of Visual Languages
& Computing, 14(6):503–541, 2003.
[8] D. Arthur and S. Vassilvitskii. k-means++: the advantages of careful
seeding. In Proceedings of the eighteenth annual ACM-SIAM symposium
on Discrete algorithms, pages 1027–1035, 2007.
[9] C. Bennett, P. Gacs, M. Li, P. Vitanyi, and W. Zurek. Information
distance. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 44(4):1407–1423,
1998.
[10] P. Berkhin. A survey of clustering data mining techniques. In J. Kogan,
C. Nicholas, and M. Teboulle, editors, Grouping Multidimensional Data,
pages 25–71. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2006.
[11] D. J. Berndt and J. Clifford. Using dynamic time warping to ﬁnd patterns in time series. In AAAI-94 Workshop on Knowledge Discovery in
Databases, volume 10, pages 359–370. Seattle, WA, 1994.
[12] M. Cover Thomas and A. Thomas Joy. Elements of information theory.
Wiley, New York, 1991.
[13] Diansheng Guo, Jin Chen, A. M. MacEachren, and Ke Liao. A
Visualization System for Space-Time and Multivariate Patterns (VISSTAMP). IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
12(6):1461–1474, 2006.
[14] D. Dransch, P. Köthur, S. Schulte, V. Klemann, and H. Dobslaw. Assessing the quality of geoscientiﬁc simulation models with visual analytics
methods – a design study. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 24(10):1459–1479, 2010.
[15] J. Dykes, A. M. MacEachren, and M.-J. Kraak. Exploring geovisualization. Elsevier, Oxford, 2005.
[16] M. Ester, H.-P. Kriegel, J. Sander, and X. Xu. A density-based algorithm
for discovering clusters in large spatial databases. In Proceedings of the
2nd International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
volume 96, pages 226–231, 1996.
[17] C. Fraley and A. E. Raftery. Model-based clustering, discriminant analysis, and density estimation. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 97(458):611–631, 2002.
[18] A. L. N. Fred and A. Jain. Data clustering using evidence accumulation.
In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Pattern Recognition, volume 4, pages 276–280, 2002.
[19] S. Frey, F. Sadlo, and T. Ertl. Visualization of temporal similarity in
ﬁeld data. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
18(12):2023–2032, 2012.
[20] J. Han and M. Kamber. Data mining: Concepts and techniques. Morgan
Kaufmann, San Francisco, 2nd edition, 2006.
[21] M. Harrower and C. A. Brewer. ColorBrewer.org: An Online Tool for Selecting Colour Schemes for Maps. The Cartographic Journal, 40(1):27–
37, 2003.
[22] N. Iam-On, S. Garrett, C. Price, and T. Boongoen. Link-based cluster
ensembles for heterogeneous biological data analysis. In Proceedings of
the IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine
(BIBM) 2010, pages 573–578, Dec 2010.
[23] L. Kaufman and P. J. Rousseeuw. Finding groups in data: an introduction
to cluster analysis. John Wiley & Sons, 2009.

VOL. 20,

NO. 12,

DECEMBER 2014

[24] J. Kehrer, F. Ladstädter, P. Muigg, H. Doleisch, A. Steiner, and H. Hauser.
Hypothesis Generation in Climate Research with Interactive Visual Data
Exploration. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 14(6):1579–1586, 2008.
[25] J. Kehrer, P. Muigg, H. Doleisch, and H. Hauser. Interactive Visual Analysis of Heterogeneous Scientiﬁc Data across an Interface. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 17(7):9340–0946, 2011.
[26] P. Köthur, M. Sips, A. Unger, J. Kuhlmann, and D. Dransch. Interactive visual summaries for detection and assessment of spatiotemporal patterns in geospatial time series. Information Visualization, 13(3):283–298,
2014.
[27] F. Ladstädter, A. K. Steiner, B. C. Lackner, B. Pirscher, G. Kirchengast,
J. Kehrer, H. Hauser, P. Muigg, and H. Doleisch. Exploration of Climate Data Using Interactive Visualization. Journal of Atmospheric and
Oceanic Technology, 27(4):667–679, 2010.
[28] T. W. Liao. Clustering of time series data – a survey. Pattern Recognition,
38(11):1857 – 1874, 2005.
[29] D. R. Lipşa, R. S. Laramee, S. J. Cox, J. C. Roberts, R. Walker, M. A.
Borkin, and H. Pﬁster. Visualization for the physical sciences. Computer
Graphics Forum, 31(8):2317–2347, 2012.
[30] A. M. MacEachren. How maps work: representation, visualization, and
design. Guilford Press, 2004.
[31] M. Nisha, S. Mohanavalli, and R. Swathika. Improving the quality of
clustering using cluster ensembles. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Information Communication Technologies (ICT) 2013, pages
88–92, 2013.
[32] T. Nocke, M. Flechsig, and U. Bohm. Visual exploration and evaluation
of climate-related simulation data. In Proceedings of Winter Simulation
Conference 2007, pages 703–711, 2007.
[33] J. Poco, A. Dasgupta, Y. Wei, W. Hargrove, C. Schwalm, R. Cook,
E. Bertini, and C. Silva. SimilarityExplorer: A Visual Inter-Comparison
Tool for Multifaceted Climate Data.
Computer Graphics Forum,
33(3):341–350, 2014.
[34] A. Strehl and J. Ghosh. Cluster ensembles - a knowledge reuse framework for combining multiple partitions. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 2002(3):583–617, 2002.
[35] B. D. Tapley, S. Bettadpur, J. C. Ries, P. F. Thompson, and M. M.
Watkins. Grace measurements of mass variability in the earth system.
Science, 305(5683):503–505, 2004.
[36] M. Thomas, J. Sündermann, and E. Maier-Reimer. Consideration of
ocean tides in an ogcm and impacts on subseasonal to decadal polar motion excitation. Geophysical Research Letters, 28(12):2457–2460, 2001.
[37] C. Tominski, J. Donges, and T. Nocke. Information visualization in climate research. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on
Information Visualization (IV), pages 298–305, 2011.
[38] K. E. Trenberth, editor. Climate System Modeling. Cambridge Universtity
Press, New York, 2009.
[39] A. Unger, S. Schulte, V. Klemann, and D. Dransch. A visual analysis concept for the validation of geoscientiﬁc simulation models. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 18(12):2216–2225, 2012.
[40] J. Woodring and H.-W. Shen. Multiscale Time Activity Data Exploration
via Temporal Clustering Visualization Spreadsheet. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 15(1):123–137, 2009.
[41] Z. Yu, H.-S. Wongb, J. You, Q. Yang, and H. Liao. Knowledge based
cluster ensemble for cancer discovery from biomolecular data. IEEE
Transactions on NanoBioscience, 10(2):76–85, 2011.
[42] X. Zhang, L. Jiao, F. Liu, L. Bo, and M. Gong. Spectral clustering ensemble applied to SAR image segmentation. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 46(7):2126–2136, 2008.
[43] Z.-H. Zhou. Ensemble methods: foundations and algorithms. Machine
learning & pattern recognition series. Chapman & Hall/CRC, Boca Raton, FL, 2012.

