NEWSFOCUS

The Sound in the Silence:
Discovering a Fish’s Soundscape
Bioacoustics pioneer Arthur Popper is getting ready to retire, but his work on how
ﬁsh perceive sound isn’t fading away
As an undergraduate more than 40 years ago,
Arthur Popper took a detour on his way to
a class on New York University’s campus in
the Bronx that set him on a course to become
the godfather of ﬁsh hearing. Popper decided
to visit a new pet shop, where he spied a
ﬁsh without eyes. He began thinking about
how it lived guided by its other senses. The
encounter eventually led Popper, now a bioacoustician at the University of Maryland,
College Park, to become one of the world’s
pioneers in understanding how ﬁsh perceive
and respond to sound. “If I hadn’t walked
by that shop that day,” he says, “I’d have a
different life.”
Today, Popper’s professional life is
defined by sound. Among bioacoustics
researchers, he’s widely known for the classic drawings of fish ear anatomy he produced as a young scientist and for co-editing
a series of inﬂuential books that colleagues
say has helped shape the growing field.
Popper has also conducted innovative studies
that have documented the effects of humangenerated sound on ﬁsh and raised questions
about the science underpinning government
regulations designed to protect sea life from
industrial noise. “I knew he was going to be
successful as a scientist,” says sensory biologist William Tavolga of the Mote Marine
Laboratory in Sarasota, Florida, who over-

1290

saw Popper’s doctoral work. “But there was
no predicting the huge amount of work he’s
done and the quality of work.”
And now that the irrepressible 69-yearold researcher is preparing for retirement,
colleagues are wondering if anyone can take
Popper’s place—and whether he’ll actually
slow down. “I’m amazed at the energy of the
guy,” says marine biologist Robert Gisiner of
the U.S. Navy’s Energy and Environmental
Readiness Division in Washington, D.C. “He
could just run me into the ground and I’m 10
years younger.”
An unanswered question
When Popper was growing up in New York
City in the 1950s, many people still shared
the notion of a silent ocean, popularized by
the explorer Jacques Cousteau. That view has
profoundly changed. We now know that many
marine animals use sound to ﬁnd food, avoid
predators, and communicate. And humans
have added their own cacophony: the thrum
of ship screws, the blast of seismic air guns
for oil exploration, and the concussive force
of pile drivers used to build docks and bridges.
Popper was one of the ﬁrst to make the scientiﬁc community aware that humanmade noise
could affect the behavior and health of animals other than marine mammals, says neuroethologist Darlene Ketten, who holds a joint

14 SEPTEMBER 2012

VOL 337 SCIENCE www.sciencemag.org
Published by AAAS

CREDIT: JANE J. LEE

B I OA C O U S T I C S

appointment with the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and Harvard Medical
School, both in Massachusetts.
As a graduate student at the City University of New York in the late 1960s, Popper
initially wanted to focus on how blind ﬁsh
determined where sound came from. “[It’s]
called sound-source localization,” and the
ability is considered to be one of the most
powerful forces driving the evolution of hearing, Popper says. “Because if you just hear
a sound and don’t know where it’s coming
from, it’s not worth hearing.”
But sound bounced around in the fish
tanks available to Popper at the time, making
experiments impossible and forcing him to
abandon his localization project. Even today,
the question is hard to study, he says. “We
know [ﬁsh] can localize sound, but how well
and how they do it is still a mystery.” Instead,
Popper moved on to studying the hearing
capabilities of Mexican blind caveﬁsh (Astyanax jordani) and its eyed ancestor (Astyanax
mexicanus). He discovered that these species
had the widest hearing range yet measured in
ﬁsh, and that blind caveﬁsh didn’t necessarily
sense pressure stimuli better than their eyed
relatives. After earning his doctorate, Popper
ultimately landed jobs at the University of
Hawaii, Manoa, and then at the Georgetown
University School of Medicine in Washington, D.C., where he taught neuroanatomy.
In 1975, Popper learned scanning electron microscopy during a sabbatical, opening
a new window into ﬁsh hearing. He used the
skill to delve into the form and function of
a ﬁsh’s inner ear, mapping the orientation of
hair cells and showing that ﬁsh can actually
regenerate damaged ones.
“One of Art’s biggest contributions was
the anatomy he did on ﬁsh hearing,” says
longtime collaborator Anthony Hawkins, a
bioacoustician and former head of ﬁsheries research for Scotland. Researchers still
use some of Popper’s elegant, detailed drawings, he says: “We still don’t know how it all
works. But we have a lot of information on
their anatomy.”
Then, in the early 1990s, Popper began
co-editing a series of books—called the
Springer Handbook of Auditory Research
(SHAR)—with his longtime friend and collaborator, fish-hearing specialist Richard
Fay. There are now 45 volumes, and each
is meant to aid investigators in understanding an area of hearing research they aren’t
necessarily experts in. Popper and Fay enlist

Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on August 3, 2015

The godfather. Bioacoustician Arthur Popper (with
the HICI-FT) used to test the effects of sounds produced by pile drivers on ﬁsh.

NEWSFOCUS

CREDIT: DAVID MANN

specialists to cover topics as diverse as hearing in bats and music perception. “Hearing
research has been changed by [the SHAR]
series,” Ketten says.

work out the kinks, but the machine now
presides over a small room at the University
of Maryland. A red metal frame supports
a steel cylinder with 8.9-centimeter-thick
walls, centered between two large shakers
that vibrate, generating pressure waves akin
to those produced by a pile driver. Tubes
surrounding the HICI-FT draw away the
enormous amount of heat generated by the
shakers, and it perches on vibration isolation
mounts to prevent it from shaking the entire
building. Fish placed inside the chamber are
exposed to sound levels they would experience if they were swimming up to 18 meters
away from a pile-driving operation.
Several years ago, Popper and colleagues
at the University of Maryland and the Paciﬁc
Northwest National Laboratory in Richland,
Washington, started by giving juvenile Chi-

ruptured swim bladders. In some species,
swim bladders both help ﬁsh regulate their
buoyancy and conduct sound into the ear.
Damaging the swim bladder could essentially
renders species such as catﬁsh hard of hearing. Popper and his colleagues also found that
the sound thresholds needed to induce such
trauma were higher than what people had previously thought. The take-home message, he
says, is that the sound levels that regulatory
agencies have been using as safety limits for
ﬁsh are lower than necessary.

A hissy ﬁt
In the last few decades, Popper has become
known for ﬁguring out how to conduct difficult experiments that examine how fish
respond to sound both in the ﬁeld and in the
laboratory. One focus is understanding how
the noise produced by pile drivers—widely
used machines that pound supports for bridges
and docks into bottom sediments—affect ﬁsh
A working retirement
and other aquatic creatures that are protected
Although Popper would love to test other
by environmental regulations.
anthropogenic sounds ﬁsh encounter using
“When people do experiments with very
the HICI-FT, it is headed back to the Transloud sounds, [they] usually have to do it in
portation Research Board of the U.S. National
the field because you can’t simulate loud
Academies, which funded the device. It’s just
sounds in the laboratory,” Popper
one loose end he’s tying up as he
says. That’s because the volume
prepares to retire in June 2013.
is just too intense: For pile drivBut even after taking his
ers, the sound can be louder than
leave, Popper will have projects
turning on a jet engine in a room.
bubbling. This past June, for
But field experiments aren’t
instance, he ﬂew out to Califoreasy. Piggybacking on construcnia to check on work he’s started
tion projects while the crew tries
with tuna researcher Barbara
to stay on schedule, for examBlock of Stanford University in
ple, is less than ideal. And workPalo Alto. Popper is helping train
ers are not going to stop and wait
blueﬁn tuna (Thunnus thynnus)
while you get your ﬁsh into place,
to respond to different sound levPopper says. As a result, past ﬁeld
els in a bid to elucidate what the
trials had been “very weakly done,
marine predators can hear. “It’s
poorly controlled, by people who
the old operant-conditioning parreally don’t understand how to
adigm where the animal works
evaluate the results of these experfor a food reward,” he explains.
iments,” he laments.
The sleek animals have taken to
In 2004, he decided to see if he
the task, Popper hints, although
could bring the studies into a conhe is cagey about the details since
trolled lab setting after a frustratit’s a work in progress. He’s also
ing consulting experience trying Hearing capabilities. Fish hearing specialist Arthur Popper is not afraid to get helping plan a third international
to determine safe noise thresholds dirty while trying to elucidate hearing sensitivity in walleye pollock.
conference on the effects of noise
for ﬁsh during pile-driving operon aquatic life, set for Budapest
ations on the San Francisco–Oakland Bay nook salmon (Oncorhynchus tshawytscha) in August 2013. (He helped kick off the
Bridge in California. The trick was ﬁnding a a hissy ﬁt; regulators were interested in the meetings in 2007.)
device that produced the needed racket with- experiments because the fish is an endanFirst, however, many of Popper’s students
out deafening researchers.
gered species. They’ve since repeated the and colleagues will gather in Florida next
The solution came from a colleague, process with other species, including striped year to honor the researcher some call the
mechanical engineer Peter Rogers of the bass (Morone saxatilis) and lake sturgeon “godfather” of their ﬁeld. “Art is an amazing
Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta. (Acipenser fulvescens).
person all around and an excellent role model
As part of a Navy study of the possible health
The HICI-FT results, parts of which were for anyone in science,” Ketten says. Former
effects of loud underwater noise on divers, published online June 2012 in PLoS ONE, students say that although Popper expected
Rogers had built a machine that allowed sci- show that the physiological effects experi- members of his lab to work hard, he also
entists to study how high-intensity sounds enced by the ﬁsh depend on the sound inten- knew how to have fun, teasing lab members
affected the lungs of submerged rats outﬁtted sity and accumulated exposure. At lower and colleagues. A few turn the tables: “Every
with a kind of rodent scuba gear. Rogers mod- sound levels, the pressure shifts caused by now and then I threaten to take his Ph.D. away
iﬁed the machine for use with ﬁsh, produc- pile driving might cause minor blood ves- from him,” says Tavolga, who was Popper’s
ing what Popper affectionately refers to as the sels in ﬁns to break and leak. Fish exposed dissertation adviser. “But he says I can’t do
“hissy ﬁt,” short for high intensity controlled to higher intensity sounds, however, could that because there’s a statute of limitations.”
impedance ﬂuid-ﬁlled wave tube (HICI-FT).
experience lethal and deafening injuries such
–JANE J. LEE
It took about 2 years for Popper’s lab to as hemorrhaging of the heart and deﬂated or Jane J. Lee is a writer in Washington, D.C.
www.sciencemag.org SCIENCE VOL 337
Published by AAAS

14 SEPTEMBER 2012

1291

