Integrative Analysis to Select Cancer Candidate Biomarkers to Targeted
Validation
Rebeca Kawahara1#, Gabriela V. Meirelles1#, Henry Heberle2, Romênia R. Domingues1,
Daniela C. Granato1, Sami Yokoo1, Rafael R. Canevarolo1,3, Flavia V. Winck1, Ana
Carolina P. Ribeiro4, Thaís Bianca Brandão4, Paulo R. Filgueiras5, Karen S. P. Cruz6,
José Alexandre Barbuto6, Ronei J. Poppi5, Rosane Minghim2, Guilherme P. Telles7,
Felipe Paiva Fonseca8, Jay W. Fox9, Alan R. Santos-Silva8, Ricardo D. Coletta8,
Nicholas E. Sherman9, Adriana F. Paes Leme1*
1

Laboratório de Espectrometria de Massas, Laboratório Nacional de Biociências,

LNBio, CNPEM, Campinas, Brazil.
2

Instituto de Ciências Matemáticas e de Computação, Universidade de São Paulo, USP,

São Carlos, Brazil.
3

Centro Infantil Boldrini, Campinas, Brazil.

4

Instituto do Câncer do Estado de São Paulo, Octavio Frias de Oliveira, São Paulo,

Brazil.
5

Instituto de Química, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, UNICAMP, Piracicaba,

Brazil.
6

Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Departamento de Imunologia, Universidade de São

Paulo, USP, São Paulo, Brazil.
7

Instituto de Computação, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, UNICAMP, Campinas,

Brazil.
8

Faculdade de Odontologia de Piracicaba, Universidade Estadual de Campinas,

UNICAMP, Piracicaba, Brazil.
9

W. M. Keck Biomedical Mass Spectrometry Lab. University of Virginia,

Charlottesville, Virginia, USA.
* To whom correspondence should be addressed: Adriana F. Paes Leme, Laboratório de
Espectrometria de Massas, Laboratório Nacional de Biociências, LNBio, CNPEM,
13083-970 Campinas, Brazil. Phone: +55 19 3512-1118; Fax: +55 19 3512-1006, Email: adriana.paesleme@lnbio.cnpem.org.br
#

these authors contributed equally to this work.

Keywords: candidate biomarker, integrative analysis, proteomics, discovery, targeted

1

ABSTRACT

Targeted proteomics has flourished as the method of choice for prospecting for
and validating potential candidate biomarkers in many diseases. However, challenges
still remain due to the lack of standardized routines that can prioritize a limited number
of proteins to be further validated in human samples. To help researchers identify
candidate biomarkers that best characterize their samples under study, a well-designed
integrative analysis pipeline, comprising MS-based discovery, feature selection
methods, clustering techniques, bioinformatic analyses and targeted approaches was
performed using discovery-based proteomic data from the secretomes of three classes of
human cell lines (carcinoma, melanoma and non-cancerous). Three feature selection
algorithms, namely, Beta-binomial, Nearest Shrunken Centroids (NSC), and Support
Vector Machine-Recursive Features Elimination (SVM-RFE), indicated a panel of 137
candidate biomarkers for carcinoma and 271 for melanoma, which were differentially
abundant between the tumor classes. We further tested the strength of the pipeline in
selecting candidate biomarkers by immunoblotting, human tissue microarrays, labelfree targeted MS and functional experiments. In conclusion, the proposed integrative
analysis was able to pre-qualify and prioritize candidate biomarkers from discoverybased proteomics to targeted MS.

2

INTRODUCTION

Discovery-based proteomics has been known as the most powerful tool for
globally profiling proteomes and has been employed to mine biomarkers and
therapeutic targets in many clinical conditions [1-5]. However, the contribution of novel
molecules in clinical practice has been disappointing, and several reasons for failure
have arisen in the long processes of biomarker and therapeutic target validation [6-8].
Recently, targeted proteomics has succeeded as the method of choice to
overcome the drawbacks in validating and verifying potential biomarkers and
therapeutic targets [7, 9-11]. Nevertheless, discovery-based proteomics can provide a
large contribution in generating hypothesis-driven targets based on shotgun proteomics
data [2, 12-15]. In addition to the bottleneck of discovery strategies such as the technical
limitations of peptide quantification, undersampling, stochastic sampling process, and
dynamic range [6, 8], there is a limited ability to use unbiased and robust methods to
treat large-scale data as a whole when aiming to determine novel candidate biomarkers
and therapeutic targets.
Ideally, for candidate biomarker outcomes in proteomics, the list of thousands of
proteins identified by the discovery methods must be reduced into a smaller subset of
features that will provide the maximal discriminating power between the conditions of
optimal sensitivity and specificity. Many methods have already been proposed to
compare the protein abundance in label-free shotgun proteomics with the aim of finding
evidence for candidate biomarkers in proteomics datasets. Most of these methods are
based on p-values that were derived from t-test [16, 17], analysis of variance (ANOVA)
[18], Fisher’s exact test [19, 20], etc. However, although these methods point to
differences in protein abundance individually across conditions, they are limited in

3

analyzing sets of data that contain multiple classes as well as providing an optimal
feature set that capture the maximal variance in the data. In this work, we aimed to
retrieve ranked lists of candidate biomarkers, which are considered here to be proteins
that change in abundance on average between the different biological sample classes. A
combination of three different methods was tested: a univariate method, Beta-binomial,
a semi-multivariate method, Nearest Shrunken Centroids (NSC), and a multivariate
method, Support Vector Machine-Recursive Features Elimination (SVM-RFE).
The mentioned methods were selected based on the following main reasons: (1)
Beta-binomial is a univariate statistical method that was described by Pham et al. [21] to
test the significance of differential protein abundances that were expressed in spectral
counts in mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Moreover, experimental results from the
same work showed that the Beta-binomial test performs favorably in comparison with
other methods (e.g., Fisher’s exact test, G-test, t-test and local-pooled-error technique)
on several datasets in terms of both the true detection rate and the false positive rate and
can also be applied in experiments with one or more replicates and in multiple condition
comparisons; (2) NSC has already been shown to have the best performance compared
to different univariate and multivariate methods in the previous work by Christin et al.
[22]; (3) SVM-RFE is based on a machine-learning technique that has a completely
different approach compared to NSC and was chosen as a complementary method to
test both the results and the performances. NSC and SVM-RFE were combined to a
double cross-validation step to define a final optimal set of discriminating proteins for
distinguishing the three secretome classes with strictly low errors. Therefore, all of the
three methods have already been separately tested and benchmarked for proteomics
datasets, but they have not been used together in the same pipeline in which both the
initial and final datasets were compared by different clustering techniques (heat

4

map/hierarchical clustering and neighbor joining clustering) and silhouette coefficients.
Furthermore, the final ranked lists of proteins were compared in a Venn diagram to be
finally evaluated/validated by targeted proteomics in our proposed discovery-to-targeted
pipeline.
In summary, the pipeline described in this work was tested on well-controlled
data obtained from the secretomes of human melanoma (A2058 and SK-MEL-28), skinand tongue-derived carcinoma (A431 and SCC-9, respectively) and non-cancerous
(HaCaT and HEK293) cell lines. The MS-based discovery step was based on a routine
shotgun analysis, which was followed by data analysis using the three mentioned
approaches (Beta-binomial, NSC and SVM-RFE). These feature selection methods
indicated that there was a panel of 137 proteins for carcinoma and 271 proteins for
melanoma that were differentially abundant in these cell types. These selected proteins
were then investigated by bioinformatics analyses, such as protein-protein interaction
networks construction, enrichment analysis and literature curation. A protein network
anticipated a potentially important role for the set of candidate biomarkers in the
carcinoma, which was especially related to the complement and coagulation cascades,
whereas in melanoma, the pathways associated with the cell cycle, cell adhesion and
ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis were highlighted as being among the most altered in this
pathologic condition. We further tested the strength of the pipeline in selecting
candidate biomarkers by immunoblotting, human tissue microarrays, label-free targeted
MS and functional experiments. It is noteworthy that the proteins Complement Factor B
(CFB) and Complement C3 (C3) were found in significantly increased levels in oral
squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC), compared to the adjacent normal tissue, and in
human saliva from oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) patients, using the
pseudoSRM approach. Moreover, CFB knockdown decreased both the migration in the

5

skin-derived epidermoid carcinoma (A431) cell line and chemotaxis in human
macrophages. Furthermore, the pipeline was also applied to a published proteomics
dataset of prostate cancer [23], and the results were compared with the approaches that
were previously used.
In conclusion, we suggest that our proposed integrative analysis based on a
discovery-to-targeted pipeline is especially valuable to better characterize candidate
biomarkers for targeted MS verification.

6

RESULTS

A novel experimental pipeline has been proposed in this study to provide the
bridge between discovery MS and targeted MS. This pipeline comprises four steps: MSbased discovery, feature selection analyses, bioinformatic tools to boost the extraction
of biological information and targeted validation (Fig. 1). As a proof of concept,
melanoma (A2058 and SK-MEL-28), skin and tongue-derived carcinoma (A431 and
SCC-9, respectively) and non-cancerous cell lines (HaCaT and HEK293) had the
protein content of their secretome collected, concentrated, trypsin digested and analyzed
by LC-MS/MS. State-of-the-art univariate and multivariate methods were then
employed to identify the most differentially abundant proteins among the three classes.
A bioinformatics platform compiled these data into integrative networks that revealed
cancer-specific biological information. These networks were able to characterize both
carcinoma and melanoma cell archetypes and to point out pathways that could be
potentially altered in each condition. Protein expression by tissue array in carcinoma
and melanoma patients’ samples and by saliva samples, as well as gene silencing and
functional experiments in cell lines provided validation for the proposed pipeline. Along
with these findings, we also described the results that were obtained when the same
pipeline was applied to an external dataset, which was a published study on prostate
cancer [23]; these findings reinforced the effectiveness of our approach.
Data Analyses
Label-free Quantitation in Data Dependent Analysis
A list of 2,574 proteins with less than 1% FDR was generated by the Scaffold Q+
software from three biological replicates (Supplementary Table S1 and Table S2). From
this total, 877 proteins presented spectral counts ≤ 2 and were discarded from the

7

following steps, leaving 1,697 remaining proteins for the subsequent analyses. The
number of proteins that were identified in each experiment is shown in Table 1, whereas
the number of proteins that were exclusive or shared by the cell lines is available in
Supplementary Figure S1.

Clustering and feature selection analyses of proteomics data
An unsupervised hierarchical clustering performed with the 1,697 proteins
mentioned above segregated the samples into two main classes, one that was composed
exclusively by melanoma cell lines and the other that was composed by carcinoma and
non-cancerous cells (Fig 2A). Interestingly, the basal cluster segregated the cells
according to their tissue of origin: from the epithelium-derived cell lines (SCC-9, A431
and HaCaT), from the skin-derived melanoma cells (SK-MEL-28 and A2058) and from
the human kidney non-cancerous cells (HEK293), although a perfect group segregation
for either non-cancerous or cancer cell lines was not observed. The result of this
exploratory, unsupervised analysis indicated that melanoma’s secretome is radically
different from that produced by carcinoma and non-cancerous cells. That finding is
probably due to the considerable similarities that are found between carcinoma and noncancerous cell secretome, despite their obvious differences.
Aiming to evoke the most prominent dissimilarities among the groups,
univariate, semi-multivariate and multivariate analyses were conducted, including the
Beta-binomial, NSC and SVM-RFE methods, respectively. The models retrieved 601,
130 and 13 proteins, respectively, that were differentially abundant among the three
secretome classes. These proteins were further associated with each class after a
decision boundary step (Supplementary Table S3).

8

Both the SVM-RFE and NSC methods had their performance assessed in terms
of double cross-validation errors, accuracy, sensitivity and specificity. These models
presented 5.5% and 0% errors in double cross-validation, and 94.4% and 100%
accuracy, respectively. Regarding the sensitivity and specificity, SVM-RFE showed
83.3% sensitivity for carcinoma and 100% for the other classes and 91.7% specificity
for non-cancerous and 100% for the other classes, whereas NSC exhibited 100%
sensitivity and specificity for all of the three classes (Supplementary Table S4.).
The candidate biomarkers retrieved from the feature selection analyses were also
used to perform the hierarchical clustering and heat maps again using the
MetaboAnalyst platform (Fig. 2B). By this later analysis considering only the selected
features, the same-class cell lines were clustered together, which confirms the set of
retrieved candidate biomarkers as good discriminating proteins for distinguishing the
three secretome classes (Fig. 2B). From this set, the Beta-binomial, NSC and SVM-RFE
models retrieved 135, 32 and 4 characteristic proteins for carcinoma and 269, 78 and 6
proteins for melanoma, respectively (Supplementary Table S5).
Furthermore, the final ranked lists of 601, 130 and 13 candidate biomarkers for
all three classes, which resulted from the Beta-binomial, NSC and SVM-RFE models,
respectively, were compared by a Venn diagram and by the Jaccard similarity
coefficient. This comparison showed that the SVM-RFE optimal feature subset is
almost completely shared by the NSC and Beta-binomial models (12 out of 13 proteins)
and that the NSC optimal feature subset is almost completely shared by the Betabinomial model (128 out of 130 proteins) (Fig 2C). Moreover, the NSC and Betabinomial output rankings were similar starting from the top-ranked proteins, and all
three models appeared to have a similar and stable behavior from the 10th to the 130th
protein in their output ranked lists (Fig 2D). Notably, the SVM-RFE model was able to

9

discriminate the three classes based on the smallest set of only 13 proteins (gene names:
C3, CLU, MEGF10, MMP8, BANF1, VIM, APEX1, CA2, TACSTD2, KRT8, TNC,
C1R and IGFBP7), of which only BANF1 was not retrieved by the other two methods.
In contrast, as expected for a univariate method, the Beta-binomial model yielded the
largest set of differentially abundant proteins, covering all of the proteins that were
retrieved by the two multivariate methods (except for two proteins from NSC). Notably,
using only the 12 candidate biomarkers retrieved by the three feature selection methods,
a perfect segregation among the carcinoma, melanoma and non-cancerous classes was
also observed (Fig 2E). The complete ranked protein lists that resulted from the three
methods are available in Supplementary Table S3; the plots showing the spectral count
distribution in the melanoma, carcinoma and non-cancerous cells for the 130 candidate
biomarkers retrieved from NSC can be found in Supplementary Figure S2.
In addition to the hierarchical clustering and heat map analysis, similarity trees
were constructed from a Euclidean distance matrix of the 18 samples considered for the
feature selection analyses. Figure 3 shows that the Neighbor Joining (NJ) trees were
capable of showing the most similar elements of the set, which were present in the same
or in nearby branches. In this work, a reasonable separation of the three classes was
found when the whole dataset was considered in the NJ tree construction (Fig. 3A)
(silhouette coefficient, SC > 0.2). However, as was also shown by the previous
unsupervised hierarchical clustering and heat map analysis for the whole dataset, the
melanoma samples were the only ones that clustered together in the same or nearby
branches connected to the same node, separated from the carcinoma and non-cancerous
samples, which were distributed in different branches and did not show a perfect
segregation in their respective classes. On the other hand, as expected, there was an
improvement in the NJ clustering and silhouette coefficients that were calculated after

10

feature selection, considering only the candidate biomarkers that were retrieved from
each model (Fig. 3B-D). For instance, if a labeled dataset has a silhouette coefficient
that is closer to 1 (ranging from -1 to 1), then the classes are almost homogeneous and
different from each other and classifiers will probably perform well in constructing a
good model with a low double cross-validation error. Consequently, this finding also
means that sets of good discriminating features (proteins) among the classes could be
retrieved by feature selection analysis.
Besides the feature selection methods described above, the univariate ANOVA
test was also performed in our data to compare our results to a classical statistical
method. In total, ANOVA retrieved 875 differentially abundant proteins (p<0.05,
Supplementary Table S3). The ANOVA result corroborates the results obtained by the
three methods proposed in our pipeline, which can be observed by the intersections in a
second Venn diagram built for the four output lists of candidate biomarkers
(Supplementary Figure S3). However, it brought over 384 exclusive proteins from a
total of 987 proteins selected by the four methods (~40%), which is a large percentage
for ANOVA to be considered in the pipeline as a method that could contribute with an
optimal set of features for selecting candidates. Moreover, when we compare the rank
index of candidate biomarkers retrieved by the three feature selection methods proposed
in the pipeline to the rank index given by ANOVA, we observed that the reduced list of
candidates selected by the three approaches were not the top candidates chosen by
ANOVA (Supplementary Table S3).
The same feature selection analyses were also performed for a published
proteomics dataset on prostate cancer [23] to validate our approach. The output final
ranked lists of candidate biomarkers that resulted from each method (Supplementary
Tables S6-S10) were analyzed by a Venn diagram, which showed that five candidates

11

that were validated/verified by different approaches in the original work by Kim et al.
[23] were also identified in the intersections of the Venn diagram (Supplementary Table
S9 and Supplementary Figure S4), which reinforces the effectiveness of the proposed
discovery-to-targeted pipeline.
Bioinformatics analyses
To evaluate the protein interaction profile within each tumor class, proteinprotein interaction networks were constructed using the IIS software for the candidate
biomarkers obtained by the feature selection methods and estimated to be associated to
carcinoma or melanoma classes (Supplementary Table S5.). The networks represent a
“snapshot” of the secretome of both classes, which illustrate the proteins that most
probably play a role in the secretome regulation of each tumor type (Fig. 4,
Supplementary Tables S11 and S12). Our network analysis showed direct connections
between the identified candidate biomarkers and the proteins that are involved in
enriched KEGG pathways (p ≤ 0.05), highlighting the most important pathways that are
likely to be activated/inhibited in each disease. Accordingly, the networks suggested a
potentially important role for carcinoma biomarkers in focal adhesion, regulation of
actin

cytoskeleton,

ECM-receptor

interaction,

glutathione

metabolism,

glycolysis/gluconeogenesis and, especially, complement and coagulation cascades,
which were not enriched among the melanoma biomarkers (Fig. 4A). In contrast, focal
adhesion, cell cycle, regulation of actin cytoskeleton, ECM-receptor interaction, cell
adhesion molecules, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis and ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis
were identified as being significantly enriched (p ≤ 0.05) pathways in the melanoma
secretome; these pathways presented at least one candidate biomarker that participates
in each of them. Focal adhesion and ECM-receptor interaction, especially, appear to
have a relevant role in melanoma due to the outstanding, differential abundance of the

12

proteins that belong to these two pathways (Fig. 4B). All of the significant enriched
pathways that were extracted from both carcinoma and melanoma networks are listed in
Supplementary Tables S11 and S12, respectively.
Furthermore, to verify whether the candidate biomarkers for carcinoma and
melanoma had been previously described as related to cancer or to some biomarker
application, an Ingenuity (IPA) biomarker filter module analysis and a search in the
Human Protein Atlas Database were performed.
The IPA biomarker analysis retrieved 45 (32%) proteins of the candidate
biomarkers identified in our study for carcinoma and 76 (28%) for melanoma, which
have been previously described as being strongly associated with cancer and/or
involved in biomarker applications. Likewise, the Human Protein Atlas Database
retrieved 32 (23%) and 60 (22%) proteins of the carcinoma and melanoma candidates,
respectively, which were found to be previously associated with cancer (Supplementary
Table S5).
These analyses were also performed for the set of candidate biomarkers that
were retrieved by the feature selection methods applied to the prostate cancer
proteomics dataset published by Kim et al. [23]. Interestingly, from the 47 proteins that
were identified in the intersection of the three methods (Supplementary Table S9 and
Supplementary Figure S4), IPA determined that 13 (28%) proteins had been associated
with some biomarker application, whereas 17 (36%) proteins had already been
described as candidate cancer biomarkers according to the Human Protein Atlas
Database (Supplementary Table S10).
Validation of the expression of candidate markers for melanoma and carcinoma
Based on the available commercial antibodies, six up-regulated proteins
retrieved by Beta-binomial, NSC and/or SVM-RFE models were chosen to be validated

13

by immunoblotting. The overexpression of Fibronectin (FN1), Tenascin-C (TNC) and
Growth/differentiation factor 15 (GDF15) in melanoma cell lines and of Complement
factor B (CFB), Talin-1 (TLN1) and Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) in
carcinoma cell lines was confirmed in the conditioned media of the six cell lines
(Supplementary Figure S5).
To further investigate whether those candidate markers were clinically
associated with tumors, we used tissue microarrays with human melanoma samples to
examine TNC and GDF15 expression. Both TNC and GDF15 were found in the
cytoplasm of the nevoid cells, with significantly higher expression levels in the tumor
cells compared with normal cells (Fig. 5-A and 5-B). Interestingly, the expression of
GDF15 was significantly higher in metastatic than in primary melanomas (one-way
ANOVA, p < 0.0001).
The expression of CFB was limited to the cytoplasm of the basal and suprabasal
layers of the normal oral tissue, whereas broad positivity was found in the tumor cells
(Fig. 5-C). Considering the intensity levels, the expression of CFB was significantly
higher in tumors compared with normal mucosa (Mann Whitney U test, p = 0.0057, Fig.
5-C). Similarly, C3 was found in the cytoplasm of the epithelial cells, but the intensity
was significantly higher in tumor cells compared to normal keratinocytes (Mann
Whitney U test, p = 0.016, Fig. 5D). Immunoreactivity for C3 was also observed in
inflammatory and endothelial cells.

Label-free targeted MS
To further test the strength of the pipeline in selecting candidate biomarkers that
were retrieved by all of the methods, we prioritized two candidates from the carcinoma

14

secretome to have their abundance assessed in the saliva of Oral Squamous Cell
Carcinoma (OSCC) patients, as a first step toward biomarker evaluation in clinical
samples. We believe that saliva is a promising biofluid for investigation due to the ease
of its collection and its direct contact with oral cancer lesions. The samples were
collected from OSCC patients, who were divided into two groups: patients who had
undergone surgical resection (named as “no lesion”, n=7) and those who had active oral
malignant lesion (named as “lesion”, n=10) at the time of the saliva collection
(Supplementary Table S13). Saliva samples from healthy individuals were also used as
a control (n=7).
We validated both C3 and CFB, and C3 was selected for being top ranked in the
three feature selection analysis results (SVM-RFE rank index=1; NSC rank index=13;
Beta-binomial rank index=15) as well as for being assigned to the complement and
coagulation cascades pathway, an enriched (p-value = 1.52e-08) carcinoma-exclusive
KEGG pathway that is based on complementary data from the Uniprot database.
Regarding CFB, it was simultaneously retrieved by NSC (rank index=33) and Betabinomial (rank index=31), and very importantly, it takes part in the same pathway as
C3. In addition, both CFB and C3 have not been previously reported to be related to
cancer biomarkers, according to the IPA biomarker analysis and The Human Protein
Atlas.
We selected two peptides for each protein based on the following criteria:
uniqueness, high relative abundance, MS/MS spectral quality, experimental observation
of proteomic data repositories (PeptideAtlas) and DDA analysis performed using LTQ
Orbitrap Velos. The targeted proteomics were performed using selected ion monitoring
(SIM) of each targeted peptide in high mass resolution for quantitation, followed by
scheduled MS/MS for confirming targeted peptide sequences (Supplementary Table

15

S14). The peak area of each targeted peptide was extracted using the Xcalibur software
(Supplementary Table S15) and normalized to the angiotensin internal standard
(Supplementary Table S16), spiked in all of the samples to a final concentration of 5
fmol/µl to correct run-to-run variations.
The averages of the normalized intensities of each peptide in each sample were
visualized in a scatter plot graph, and ANOVA followed by Tukey’s test was performed
to evaluate the statistical significance among the conditions (Fig. 6). It was observed
that the saliva from the OSCC patients with lesions had a significantly higher
normalized intensity of the precursor area of both CFB and C3 compared to healthy
subjects with respect to all of the peptides evaluated (Fig. 6A-D). Additionally, the C3
peptide, IPIEDGSGEVVLSR, and the CFB peptide, YGLVTYATYPK, both showed a
significant difference between the patients without a lesion and with a lesion (Fig. 6B
and 6C). When the sum of the three transitions of each peptide (normalized by the sum
of the three transitions of the angiotensin internal peptide) was considered, similar
results were found (Supplementary Figure S6). The extracted ion current peak area from
MS1 and the three MS/MS transitions as well as the CV% of each replicate are shown
in Supplementary Tables S15 and S16.
The performance of the method was evaluated using angiotensin spiked in the
HEK cell lysate digest (500 ng) in five different concentrations, for which each sample
was run in triplicate. Good linearity (R=0.998) (Supplementary Figure S7) and
CV<15% were observed at three concentration points (Supplementary Table S17).

16

CFB knockdown decreased the migration of A431 cells and impaired the
chemoattraction of human macrophages
The final approach that was used to explore the strength of the pipeline was to
perform functional assays, which was chosen because of the implication that CFB could
have in biological processes that are related to cancer.
It is well known that complement proteins are considered to be powerful
proinflammatory molecules in the body [24], and recently, C3 was evidenced as a key
player in the production and activation of ovarian cancer growth and progression [25];
however, there is still no evidence associated with CFB in oral tumorigenic processes.
Therefore, we performed the knockdown of CFB in the A431 cell line using siRNA,
and we first evaluated the effect of this protein in cell migration. As observed in Fig.
7A, CFB knockdown decreased the migration of A431 cells compared with mock and
control siRNAs (one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s test, n=2, p<0.001).
Furthermore, CFB is a protein that is secreted by macrophages, fibroblasts,
endothelial cells and tumor cells [24]. Therefore, we evaluated the paracrine effect that
CFB depletion in tumor cells could exert on macrophage chemotaxis. To accomplish
this goal, macrophages were placed in the upper chamber of a transwell plate, whereas
A431 cells that were treated either with mock, control siRNA or siRNA against CFB
were laid in the lower chamber of the same plate. Macrophage migration through the
transwell was significantly reduced in CFB knockdown A431 cells, which suggested
that the presence of this protein in the conditioned medium had the ability to modulate
macrophage taxis (Fig. 7B, one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s test, n=2, p<0.001).
Cell knockdown for CFB was confirmed by qRT-PCR (Fig. 7C). Together, these
experiments showed that CFB protein plays a role in tumorigenic processes such as
macrophage chemotaxis and cell migration.

17

DISCUSSION
This study introduced an integrative analysis based on a pipeline that combines
MS-based discovery followed by feature selection methods, clustering, Venn diagram,
network analyses, and targeted approaches to generate reliable hypothesis-driven targets
based on shotgun proteomics, to provide a bridge between discovery MS and targeted
MS.
Well-controlled proteomic data from the secretomes of three classes of human
cell lines were analyzed with respect to the protein content of their secretomes using
discovery-based proteomics. To retrieve ranked lists of candidate biomarkers, a
combination of a univariate method (Beta-binomial), a semi-multivariate method (NSC)
and a multivariate method (SVM-RFE) was tested. The great advantage of the feature
selection methods used in this work is that NSC and SVM-RFE models summarize
thousands of features into a few key components that capture the maximal variance in
the data. Together with the Beta-binomial model, which was used to test the
significance of differential protein abundances expressed in spectral counts, the three
ranked lists of candidate biomarkers were retrieved and compared using the Jaccard
similarity coefficient and a Venn diagram, to be further evaluated by bioinformatic
analyses (interaction networks, pathway enrichment and biomarker investigation) and
targeted proteomics. Moreover, both the initial and final datasets were compared by
different clustering techniques (heat map/hierarchical clustering and neighbor joining
clustering) and silhouette coefficients, which showed an improvement in both the
clustering and silhouettes after feature selection and served as a proof-of-concept that
the set of retrieved candidates was constituted by good discriminating proteins for
distinguishing the three secretome classes.
Our approach proved to be of great value in tracking potentially promising

18

candidate biomarkers from proteomics data, since many of these proteins have already
been demonstrated to be associated with cancer. For example, both the IPA and Human
Protein Atlas Database analyses retrieved, respectively, 32% and 23% of the carcinoma
candidates and 28% and 22% of the melanoma candidates that were previously found to
be associated with cancer (Supplementary Table S5).
To further explore the biological role of these findings, we integrated the
proteomics data into networks that highlighted the direct connections between the
selected candidates and their possible roles in each disease (Fig. 4). Despite the highly
complex and dynamic nature of network biology [26], our interaction networks enabled
us to easily sum up all of the proteomics data and decipher the main cellular contexts of
the candidate biomarkers in carcinomas and melanomas. The proteins were clustered in
highly enriched pathways and were visualized by their relative abundances through
node colors and sizes; most of the candidates were found to be related to cell-cell
communication and interactions. Specifically, this analysis retrieved exclusive pathways
for the carcinoma candidates, such as complement and coagulation cascades (Fig. 4A),
and for the melanoma candidates, such as cellular functions associated with the cell
cycle, cell adhesion and ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis (Fig. 4B).
In the final steps of the proposed pipeline, we tested the promising proteins CFB
and C3 as candidate carcinoma biomarkers, which in addition to being associated with
the enriched complement and coagulation cascade pathway, were validated using
immunoblotting, tissue microarrays and retrieved in the intersections of the feature
selection methods.
In the first approach, we have indeed found a higher expression of CFB and C3
proteins using a label-free pseudoSRM analysis of human saliva from Oral Squamous
Cell Carcinoma (OSCC) patients in comparison with healthy individuals (Fig. 6).

19

Because saliva is simple to collect and process, it may lead to a useful clinical tool for
the noninvasive prognosis of oral cancer in the future [14, 27]. It is important to
highlight that oral cancer, primarily OSCC, is the sixth most common cancer and is an
important public health concern worldwide [28], with low 5-year survival rate due to
the compounding factors of late detection and lack of truly effective therapies [29, 30].
Although complement components are primarily synthesized locally by many
cell types, including macrophages, fibroblasts and endothelial cells [31], some
neoplastic cells have also been shown to synthesize and secrete components of the C
system [32-34]; however, the role of the complement system in tumor cells remains
controversial. Recently, an autocrine effect of complement proteins has been shown;
specifically, C3 and C5 are secreted by ovarian cancer cells on tumor growth [25]. It is
also well known that the complement system contributes to inflammation, mainly
through C3a and C5a, which are the most powerful proinflammatory anaphylatoxins in
the body [24, 35] and to immunosuppression through components such as C3, C4 and
C5a [36]. Interestingly, the adopting characteristics that involve the inflammatory state
and the ability to avoid the immune system have been emerging as hallmarks in cancer
[37].
Because no evidence was shown regarding the function of CFB in cancer cells,
in the second approach, we explored the functional role of CFB in tumorigenic
processes, such as cell migration and chemotaxis. The CFB knockdown in the skinderived epidermoid carcinoma (A431) cells decreased the ability of the cells to migrate
and the chemotaxis of human macrophages (Fig. 7A/B), which suggests that, in addition
to a higher expression in OSCC tissues and saliva, CFB might mediate these events in
carcinomas.
Furthermore, we applied our pipeline for a published label-free proteomic

20

dataset [23], which previously reported the identification of 133 significantly
differentially expressed proteins in extracapsular and organ-confined prostate cancer
direct-EPS fluids using a hierarchical Bayesian statistical algorithm known as QSpec.
Among these proteins, five proteins were validated/verified using different methods
(ELISA, Western blot and SRM-MS). Using the feature selection methods proposed in
our pipeline, the same five proteins validated by Kim et al. [23] were also found in the
intersections of our Venn diagram analysis (SFN, MME, TGM4, TIMP1 and PARK7,
Supplementary Table S9), reinforcing the effectiveness of our approach.
In conclusion, the proposed integrative analysis based on a discovery-to-targeted
pipeline was able to pre-qualify potential candidates from discovery-based proteomics
to targeted MS and can contribute to the next phases of biomarker development in
translational initiatives to drive either patient stratification, decision making or
intervention.

21

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture
SCC-9 cells (squamous cell carcinoma, a tumor cell line originated from a human
tongue squamous cell carcinoma) were obtained from the American Type Culture
Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA) and cultured in DMEM/Ham’s F12 medium
(Cultilab), supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), antibiotics and 0.4 µg/ml
hydrocortisone. Human keratinocyte HaCaT (immortalized, but not transformed,
epithelial cell line), Human embryonic kidney HEK293 and human melanoma A2058
cell lines (isolated from a metastatic site in a skin-derived lymph node) were maintained
in DMEM containing 10% FBS and antibiotics. Human melanoma SK-MEL-28 cells
(malignant skin-derived melanoma cell line) and human epidermoid carcinoma A431
(skin-derived epidermoid carcinoma cell line) were grown in Roswell Park Memorial
Institute (RPMI)−1640 medium supplemented with 10% FBS and antibiotics. All cells
were maintained at 37°C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere.
Sample preparation for MS
Label-free Discovery Proteomics: Cells at 80% confluence (two 15-cm dishes per
condition per experiment) were gently washed three times in phosphate buffered saline
(PBS) and incubated in a serum-free medium (20 ml per dish) for 24 h at 37 °C. After
collection of the conditioned media EDTA and PMSF (Phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride)
were added at a final concentration of 1 mM. Cell debris and intact cells were
eliminated by centrifugation at 4,000 rpm (Eppendorf Centrifuge 5810R) for 5 min at 4
°C and the conditioned media were subsequently concentrated using a 3000-Dalton
centrifugal filter (Millipore, Billerica, MA) at 4,000 x g at 4°C. Protein concentrations
were determined using a Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Proteins (80
µg) were treated with a final concentration of 1.6 M urea, following reduction (5 mM
22

dithiothreitol, 25 min at 56°C), alkylation (14 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min at room
temperature in the dark) and digestion with trypsin (1:50, w/w). The reaction was
stopped with 1% TFA and desalted with Sep-pack cartridges (Waters). The samples
were dried in a vacuum concentrator, reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed by
LC-MS/MS. Three independent experiments were performed for each cell line.
Label-free Targeted Proteomics: The saliva was collected from healthy
individuals (n=7), patients who underwent surgical resection (named as no lesion, n=7)
and patients with active oral malignant lesion (named as lesion, n=10). Individuals were
asked to first rinse their mouth with 5 ml of drinking water and to harvest the saliva into
a glass receptacle. Saliva was then aliquot in 2 ml tubes and immediately frozen at -80
°C. All patients and volunteers enrolled signed a formulary stating their awareness and
consent for the study, approved by the Research Ethics Committee of Faculdade de
Odontologia de Piracicaba, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, UNICAMP,
Piracicaba, Brazil.
Proteins were extracted by homogenizing the 100 µl of whole saliva with 100 µl
of a solution containing 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 8 M urea, 2 M thiourea containing
Protease Inhibitor Cocktail cOmplete Mini Tablets (Roche, Auckland New Zealand), 5
mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF and 1 mM DTT. Samples were sonicated for 10 min and
centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 5 min. Protein concentrations were determined using a
Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Five fmol/µl of angiotensin synthetic
peptide (precursor m/z 432.8998, +3, DRVYIHPFHL, Sigma-Aldrich) were added to
each peptide mixture (600 ng of total protein) as an internal reference peptide.
Mass spectrometric analysis
Label-free Discovery Proteomics: An aliquot containing 2.2 µg of proteins was
analyzed on an ETD-enabled LTQ Orbitrap Velos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher

23

Scientific) connected to a nanoflow liquid chromatography column (LC-MS/MS) by an
EASY-nLC System (Proxeon Biosystem) through a Proxeon nanoelectrospray ion
source. Peptides were separated by a 2-90% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid
using a pre-column EASY-Column (2 cm x id 100 μm, 5 μm particle size), and an
analytical column PicoFrit Column (20 cm x ID75 μm, 5 μm particle size, New
Objective), at a flow of 300 nl/min over 212 min. The nanoelectrospray voltage was set
to 1.7 kV, and the source temperature was 275°C. All instrument methods for the LTQ
Orbitrap Velos were set up in the data-dependent analysis (DDA) mode. The full scan
MS spectra (m/z 300-2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to
a target value of 1e6. The resolution in the Orbitrap was set to r= 60,000. The 20 most
intense peptide ions with charge states ≥ 2 were sequentially isolated to a target value of
5,000 and fragmented in the linear ion trap by low-energy CID (normalized collision
energy of 35%). The signal threshold for triggering an MS/MS event was set to 500
counts. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with an exclusion size list of 500, an exclusion
duration of 60 s, and a repeat count of 1. An activation q= 0.25 and an activation time of
10 ms were used.
Label-free Targeted Proteomics: An aliquot containing 600 ng of digested proteins
from saliva containing 5 fmol/µl of spiked synthetic angiotensin peptide was analyzed
on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer as previously described. Briefly, peptides
were separated by a 2-90% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid using an analytical
column PicoFrit Column (20 cm x ID75 μm, 5 μm particle size, New Objective), at a
flow of 300 nl/min over 80 min. The resolution in the Orbitrap was set to r= 60,000.
The AGC target was 1.00e5 for SIM scans in the Orbitrap mass analyzer and 1.00e4 for
MS/MS scans in the ion trap mass analyzer. The wide SIM windows were defined
between 15 amu over the mass range of the selected C3 and CFB peptides. Targeted

24

MS/MS was performed in the linear ion trap using global scheduled inclusion lists. The
data were analyzed using the Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to determine
the extracted ion current peak area for MS1 and three transitions for each targeted
peptide. Two technical replicates from each sample were performed. Each peptide was
normalized by dividing the individual peptide (precursor area or the sum of three ion
transitions/peptide) by the individual angiotensin reference peptides (precursor area or
the sum of three ion transitions/peptide).
Data analysis
Label-free quantitation in data dependent analysis: Peak lists (msf) were generated
from the raw data files using the Proteome Discoverer software version 1.3 (Thermo
Fisher Scientific) with the Sequest search engine and searched against the Human
International Protein Database (IPI) v. 3.86 (91,522 sequences; 36,630,302 residues),
with the following parameters: carbamidomethylation as the fixed modification,
oxidation of methionine as the variable modification, one trypsin missed cleavage and a
tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor and 1 Da for fragment ions. All datasets were
processed using the workflow feature in the Proteome Discoverer software, and the
resulting search data were further analyzed in the software ScaffoldQ+v.3.3.1. The
scoring parameters (Xcorr and Peptide Probability) in the ScaffoldQ+ software were set
to obtain a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1%, using the number of total spectra
output from the ScaffoldQ+ software. A normalization criterion, the quantitative value,
was applied to the spectral counts [38, 39].
All mass spectrometric raw and msf files associated with this study are available
for download via FTP from the PeptideAtlas data repository by accessing the following
link: http://www.peptideatlas.org/PASS/ PASS00388.

25

Feature selection analyses of proteomics data
Heat map and hierarchical clustering analyses
Files containing the identified proteins and their spectral counts were used for
the clustering and heat maps generation, as well as to perform the feature selection
analyses. Heat maps and hierarchical clustering were constructed in the web-based
chemometrics platform MetaboAnalyst 2.0 using the Pearson distance measure. For this
specific analysis, protein spectral counts were previously z-score transformed.
Neighbor joining trees
In order to evaluate how similar the three classes were when considering their
spectral counts distribution within the samples, the secretome dataset was analyzed
using the neighbor joining (NJ) clustering method [40]. The phenetic trees were
constructed from an Euclidean distance matrix using the VisPipeline software
(http://vicg.icmc.usp.br/infovis2/Tools), developed at Instituto de Ciências Matemáticas
e de Computação, Universidade de São Paulo, USP, São Carlos, Brazil. The silhouette
coefficients [41] were also calculated for the 18 secretome dataset samples (both the
raw data and their NJ clustering) using the VisPipeline software. The closest to 1 the
silhouette coefficient (ranging from -1 to 1), the more efficient is data clusterization.
Silhouette coefficients were also calculated after feature selection, in order to check for
the coefficients improvement.
Identification of candidate biomarkers
The univariate Beta-binomial model was used to test the significance of protein
differential abundances expressed in spectral counts in our label-free mass
spectrometry-based proteomics dataset. The Beta-binomial model was constructed using
a software package implemented in R according to Pham et al. [21].
In addition, protein spectral counts were submitted to other two different

26

approaches: the semi-multivariate Nearest Shrunken Centroids (NSC) and the
multivariate Support Vector Machine-Recursive Features Elimination (SVM-RFE). The
NSC and the SVM-RFE models were also performed using software packages
implemented in R according to Tibshirani et al. [42] and Guyon et al. [43], respectively.
For both methods, a double cross-validation procedure was applied to define the optimal
feature (protein) subsets (N) from the ranked proteins lists (independently ranked by
each method). In the case of the SVM-RFE model, the optimal feature subset was the
smallest set that provided the minimum mean classification error, whereas for the NSC
model it was the subset that minimized the classification error and maximized the sum
of true class probabilities [22]. The double cross-validation procedure was developed
and implemented in R based on the work of Christin et al. [22]. Both feature selection
methods had their performance assessed in terms of accuracy, sensitivity and
specificity, using the caret package implemented in R [44]. The output final ranked lists
of candidate biomarkers that resulted from each model (N defined by p < 0.05, in the
case of the Beta-binomial model, or by double cross-validation, in the case of NSC and
SVM-RFE models) were also compared with each other using the Jaccard similarity
coefficient and a Venn diagram and considered for further analyses.
To compare our results to a classical statistical method, besides the methods
described above, the univariate ANOVA test was also performed in our data using the
ScaffoldQ+ software, with N defined by p < 0.05.
The same feature selection analyses using the three methods were performed for
a published proteomics dataset of prostate cancer [23] in order to validate our proposed
pipeline. The output final ranked lists of candidate biomarkers that resulted from each
model were also compared by a Venn diagram.

27

Double cross-validation
The double cross-validation (DCV) is a type of statistical validation stricter than
the cross-validation (CV), as in DCV a CV is performed within another CV. A CV error
is an inappropriate estimate of the prediction error of the model, since this error is not
based on an independent test set, as all data – both test and training samples – are used
at once. Therefore, in order to avoid overly optimistic performance estimates, a “nested”
CV scheme was performed in the DCV to estimate the prediction error, in which the
parameter optimization is executed in an internal loop (inner loop) and the prediction
error is estimated in an external loop (outer loop) on a completely independent set of
samples [22, 45]
NSC (Nearest Shrunken Centroids)
The NSC double cross-validation was developed as follows:
1. Each inner loop (from a total of five) which is associated to an outer loop (from
a total of six) calculates one model and one ranking using 90 threshold values.
Many variables are discarded based on the threshold values and on the data set.
A test data set associated to each inner loop is used to test each model and
threshold combination. For each model the threshold that gives the minimum
error with respect to the test data set and maximum probability score is recorded.
2. At the end of each outer loop, the maximum threshold among the five inner
loops thresholds, that gives the minimum error and maximum probability overall
is selected (resulting in the minimum N).
3. The thresholds for each outer loop are then applied to the training data set for
model calculation and are challenged with the respective test data sets. The
outer loop threshold is then selected by the minimum error, followed by the
maximum probability and by the maximum threshold value.

28

4. The double cross-validation error is the average of the errors of the inner
thresholds applied to their respective outer loops.
The NSC double cross-validation was repeated 100 times, and the final double
cross-validation error was calculated as the closest value to the average of all 100 errors.
N was then selected from this final double cross-validation error, followed by the
maximum probability and by the maximum threshold value associated with the final
error.
SVM-RFE (Support Vector Machine-Recursive Features Elimination)
In the case of SVM-RFE, the majority of calculated Ns in the inner loops were
extremely small, ranging between one and four. Thus, when applying these Ns in the
outer loops, models with only a few variables (approximately four) were constructed,
and when using the test data set of the outer loops, errors ended up being extremely
large (around 50%). Therefore, a different approach for the SVM-RFE double crossvalidation was developed as follows:
1. Instead of using the minimum N from the inner loops of each outer loop, the
mean error from the five inner loops is calculated for each value of N. Then, a
minimum N that also minimizes e(N) is selected, where e(N) is the mean error
of the inner loops when the first N proteins are considered.
2. The process is repeated for the six outer loops, again selecting the minimum N
minimizing e(N). In general, the value of N presenting minimal error is selected
over 30 training subsets.
3. Because the value of N is calculated by the average of the five inner loops, the
ranking is also calculated based on such loops. For this calculation, the vectors
W[i] of weights of each variable for each inner loop are multiplied. Thus, the

29

ranking

within

an

outer

loop

is

the

product

vector

W'

=

W[1]W[2]W[3]W[4]W[5].
4. This weight vector W' will define the ranking for each outer loop. This rank,
with N selected from the corresponding inner loop, is used to construct the
SVM-RFE model for a loop and to calculate its error.
5. The double cross-validation error is the average of the errors of the six outer
loops.
The SVM-RFE double cross-validation was repeated 100 times, and the final
double cross-validation error was calculated as the closest value to the average of all
100 errors. N was then selected as the value associated with this final double crossvalidation error.
Estimation of protein classes
After the feature selection analyses, aiming to characterize the retrieved proteins
as candidate biomarkers of each cell type, the secretome class in which each protein
abundance changed the most among all classes was estimated. For that, a routine was
developed and implemented in R, as further described. Proteins were associated to one
of the three classes (melanoma, carcinoma or non-cancerous) using decision boundaries
based on protein average spectral count values found in each class. After calculating the
average values (hence, one value for each class, e.g., x ≤ y ≤ z), two boundaries were
established as the mathematical intermediate point between the average values
(B1=(x+y)/2 and B2=(y+z)/2). The average values were then associated to their closest
boundary and classes were assigned index 1 if closest to the boundary with the lowest
value, or 2 in the opposite case. In the example above, x would always be associated to
B1 and z to B2; y attribution, however, would depend on how far x and z were from y.
If y was associated to B1, both x and y classes were labeled with index 1; z class,

30

otherwise, would score 2 and would be the class in which the corresponding protein
abundance changed the most compared to the other two classes. If y was associated to
B2, y and z would be labeled with index 2, whereas x would score 1 and would be the
class in which the corresponding protein abundance is the most altered (Supplementary
Table S3, “Class boundary index” column). These indexes were used to classify
proteins in the dataset, considering that proteins are candidate biomarkers of the
secretome classes where the average abundance values are the most altered compared to
the other classes.
Bioinformatics analyses
To explore the biological significance of the variables that greatly contributed to
the characterization of each tumor class, protein-protein interaction networks were
constructed using the Integrated Interactome System (IIS) software [46], developed at
Laboratório Nacional de Biociências, CNPEM, Campinas, Brazil, for the candidate
biomarkers identified by either the Beta-binomial, NSC and SVM-RFE models, and
further estimated to be associated to the carcinoma or melanoma classes (Table E4).
Enrichment analyses were performed in the networks using the IIS software for the
curated pathways from the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) [47].
Significantly enriched KEGG pathways (p ≤ 0.05) for proteins of carcinoma and
melanoma secretomes were assigned as clusters in the networks and different colors and
sizes were attributed to proteins proportionally to their fold change compared to the
non-cancerous secretome class (-1.3 ≥ FC ≥ 1.3). Zero values were replaced by one in
order to calculate the fold change. The resultant networks were visualized using the
Cytoscape 2.8.2 software [48].
To evaluate whether the candidate biomarkers for melanoma and carcinoma
were previously described related to cancer or to some biomarker application, a
31

biomarker analysis was performed using the Ingenuity Systems Pathway software (IPA;
Ingenuity Systems, Redwood City, CA). The Ingenuity biomarker filter module analysis
was performed based on the following criteria: biofluids – “all”, disease – “cancer”,
species – “human”, and biomarker application – “all”. Moreover, the Human Protein
Atlas [49] was used to determine whether the retrieved candidates were previously
indicated as cancer biomarkers.
Immunoblotting
Proteins (5 µg) in the conditioned media from HaCaT, SCC-9, A431, A2058, SKMEL-28 and HEK293 cell lines were separated under disulfide reducing conditions
using SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and transferred onto
nitrocellulose membranes. The membranes were blocked in 5% dry milk in Tris-Tween
buffered saline (TTBS). Membranes were then incubated overnight at 4°C with the
following antibodies: anti-fibronectin (1:1000, Abcam), anti-tenascin-C (1:1000,
Abcam), anti-GDF15 (1:1000, Abcam), anti-talin-1 (1:1000, Abcam), anti-EGFR
(1:5000, Santa Cruz) and anti-CFB (1:1000, Abcam). Membranes were washed,
incubated in horseradish peroxidase conjugated secondary antibodies and developed
using enhanced chemiluminescence detection according to the manufacturer’s
instructions (Amersham Biosciences).
Tissue array immunohistochemistry and statistical analysis
High density tissue microarrays were obtained from Biomax (OR601a and
ME1004a). The presence of Complement Factor B (CFB) and Complement Component
3 (C3) was analyzed in 10 cancer-adjacent normal tissues and in 47 primary oral
squamous cell carcinomas by immunohistochemistry using the streptavidin-biotin
peroxidase complex (Dako). For tenascin-C and GDF15, 20 benign nevoid lesions
(intradermal and compound nevus), 50 primary melanomas and 20 metastatic
32

melanomas were subjected to immunohistochemical analysis with phosphatase
alkaline/permanent red-based method (Dako). Protein quantification was assessed with
the aid of Aperio Scanscope CS® Slide Scanner and the Pixel Count V9 algorithm
software (Aperio Technologies, Vista, CA; USA). By using specific input parameters,
the percentage of cytoplasm positivity was calculated and classified as weak, moderate
and strong, according to its staining intensity. Each category received an intensity score,
1 to weak, 2 to moderate and 3 to strong staining. The final score of each tissue sample
was calculated as the sum of the percentage of each category multiplied by their
respective intensity scores as the following formula: Score = (%weak x 1) +
(%moderate x 2) + (%strong x 3). Mann Whitney U and one-way ANOVA (p-value <
0.05) were used to compare protein quantities between groups.
Small interfering RNA transfection
For silencing CFB gene, 3x105 skin-derived epidermoid carcinoma (A431) cells
were seeded in a six-well culture plate and transfected with 50 nM small interfering
RNA (siRNA) duplex (sc-44510, Santa Cruz) and Lipofectamine 2000 according to the
manufacturer’s instructions (Invitrogen). Random stealth siRNA duplexes coding for
nonfunctional RNAs served as control (sc-37007, Santa Cruz). After 72 h of incubation
at 37 °C and 5% CO2 atmosphere, transfection success was evaluated by real-time
quantitative PCR and the cells have proceeded immediately for cell migration assay as
described below.
Real-time Quantitative PCR
Skin-derived epidermoid carcinoma (A431) cells had their total RNA extracted by
TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen Corporation), and 2 µg of total RNA were used for retrotranscription with a First-Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (GE Healthcare). Real-time
quantitative PCR for CFB was performed using a SYBR Green PCR Master Mix
33

(Applied Biosystems), and dissociation curves were generated to confirm the specificity
of the products. The threshold cycle (CT) values of the targeted gene were normalized
relative to the glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase gene expression, and relative
expression ratios were calculated using the 2-ΔΔ Ct method. Three independent
experiments were performed in triplicates. The following PCR primers were used: CFB
forward

5’-TCTCAG

TCATTCGCCCTTCA-3’

CCTACGCTGACCTTGAT-3’;
GAAGGTGAAGGTCGGAGTCAAC-3’

GAPDH
and

and

reverse

forward
reverse

5’5’-

5’-CAGAGTTAAAA

GCAGCCCCTGGT-3’.
In vitro differentiation of macrophages derived from monocytes
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were collected from healthy
volunteers through apheresis, performed in a Trima Accel System (Cobe BCT, Denver,
CO, USA), at the Hospital Alemão Oswaldo Cruz, São Paulo, Brazil, after informed
consent of donors. This procedure was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of
the same institution. For the enrichment of mononuclear cells, the product of apheresis
was submitted to a separation with Ficoll-Paque (GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences AB,
Uppsala, Sweden) for 30 min at 900 x g at 18°C. Mononuclear cells were collected and
centrifuged at 600 x g for 10 min at 18 °C with RPMI-1640 medium (Gibco, Grand
Island, NY, EUA) and washed twice with RPMI-1640 medium at 300 x g and 200 x g,
respectively. The mononuclear cells were then resuspended in R10 supplemented with
1% of Antibiotic-Antimycotic (Gibco, Grand Island, NY, EUA), seeded in a 24-well
plate (3x106 cells/ml suspension) and incubated at 37 °C and 5% CO2 atmosphere for 2
h. After this period, non-adherent cells were removed and cell medium was
supplemented with 50 ng/ml GM-CSF (PeproTech, Rocky Hill, NJ, USA). These cells
were maintained in culture for seven days for differentiation of monocytes into

34

macrophages.
Transwell migration assay
Untreated (mock), control siRNA-transfected (scramble) and CFB siRNAtransfected skin-derived epidermoid carcinoma (A431) cells (3x105 cells) allowed to
migrate for 16 h toward the lower chamber containing RPMI medium supplemented
with 1% FBS. Two independent experiments were performed in triplicate.
For the co-culture assay, macrophage cells (7.5x104 cells) were added in the upper
chamber, and either mock, scrambled or CFB siRNA-transfected A431 cells (7.5x104
cells) were added into the transwell plate lower chamber in 150 µl of serum-free RPMI1640. At the end of the assay, the remaining cells at the top chamber were removed
using a cotton swab, whereas the cells at the bottom of the insert filter were fixed with
10% formaldehyde for 10 min, washed with PBS and stained with 1% toluidine blue
solution in 1% borax for 5 min. The dye was eluted in 1% SDS and absorbance was
measured at 620 nm. Two independent experiments were performed in triplicate.

35

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by FAPESP Grants: 2009/54067-3, 2010/19278-0,
2011/22421-2 and 2009/53839-2 and CNPq Grants: 470567/2009-0, 470549/2011-4,
301702/2011-0 and 470268/2013-1.

CONFLICT OF INTERESTS
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

AUTHOR’S CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceived and designed the experiments: AFPL, RK, GVM. Conducted proteomic
work: AFPL, RK, RRD. Conducted cell culture experiments: RK. Performed
immunohistochemistry analysis: DCG, SY, FPF, ARSS, RDC. Performed statistical
data analysis: GVM, HH, PRF, RJP, RM, GPT. Contributed reagents/materials/analysis
tools: KSPC, JAB, ACPR, TBB, FVW, JWF, NES. Wrote the paper: AFPL, RK, GVM.

36

References
[1] Kulasingam V, Diamandis EP. Strategies for discovering novel cancer biomarkers
through utilization of emerging technologies. Nature clinical practice Oncology.
2008;5:588-99.
[2] Wu CC, Hsu CW, Chen CD, Yu CJ, Chang KP, Tai DI, Liu HP, Su WH, Chang YS,
Yu JS. Candidate serological biomarkers for cancer identified from the secretomes of 23
cancer cell lines and the human protein atlas. Molecular & cellular proteomics : MCP.
2010;9:1100-17.
[3] Chen R, Pan S, Brentnall TA, Aebersold R. Proteomic profiling of pancreatic cancer
for biomarker discovery. Molecular & cellular proteomics : MCP. 2005;4:523-33.
[4] Shimwell NJ, Bryan RT, Wei W, James ND, Cheng KK, Zeegers MP, Johnson PJ,
Martin A, Ward DG. Combined proteome and transcriptome analyses for the discovery
of urinary biomarkers for urothelial carcinoma. British journal of cancer.
2013;108:1854-61.
[5] White NM, Masui O, Desouza LV, Krakovska O, Metias S, Romaschin AD, Honey
RJ, Stewart R, Pace K, Lee J, Jewett MA, Bjarnason GA, Siu KW, et al. Quantitative
proteomic analysis reveals potential diagnostic markers and pathways involved in
pathogenesis of renal cell carcinoma. Oncotarget. 2014;5:506-18.
[6] Rifai N, Gillette MA, Carr SA. Protein biomarker discovery and validation: the long
and uncertain path to clinical utility. Nature biotechnology. 2006;24:971-83.
[7] Whiteaker JR, Lin C, Kennedy J, Hou L, Trute M, Sokal I, Yan P, Schoenherr RM,
Zhao L, Voytovich UJ, Kelly-Spratt KS, Krasnoselsky A, Gafken PR, et al. A targeted
proteomics-based pipeline for verification of biomarkers in plasma. Nature
biotechnology. 2011;29:625-34.
[8] Makawita S, Diamandis EP. The bottleneck in the cancer biomarker pipeline and
protein quantification through mass spectrometry-based approaches: current strategies
for candidate verification. Clinical chemistry. 2010;56:212-22.
[9] Picotti P, Rinner O, Stallmach R, Dautel F, Farrah T, Domon B, Wenschuh H,
Aebersold R. High-throughput generation of selected reaction-monitoring assays for
proteins and proteomes. Nature methods. 2010;7:43-6.
[10] Picotti P, Bodenmiller B, Aebersold R. Proteomics meets the scientific method.
Nature methods. 2013;10:24-7.
[11] Gillette MA, Carr SA. Quantitative analysis of peptides and proteins in
biomedicine by targeted mass spectrometry. Nature methods. 2013;10:28-34.
[12] Chang KP, Yu JS, Chien KY, Lee CW, Liang Y, Liao CT, Yen TC, Lee LY,
Huang LL, Liu SC, Chang YS, Chi LM. Identification of PRDX4 and P4HA2 as
metastasis-associated proteins in oral cavity squamous cell carcinoma by comparative
tissue proteomics of microdissected specimens using iTRAQ technology. Journal of
proteome research. 2011;10:4935-47.

37

[13] de Jong EP, Xie H, Onsongo G, Stone MD, Chen XB, Kooren JA, Refsland EW,
Griffin RJ, Ondrey FG, Wu B, Le CT, Rhodus NL, Carlis JV, et al. Quantitative
proteomics reveals myosin and actin as promising saliva biomarkers for distinguishing
pre-malignant and malignant oral lesions. PloS one. 2010;5:e11148.
[14] Hu S, Arellano M, Boontheung P, Wang J, Zhou H, Jiang J, Elashoff D, Wei R,
Loo JA, Wong DT. Salivary proteomics for oral cancer biomarker discovery. Clinical
cancer research : an official journal of the American Association for Cancer Research.
2008;14:6246-52.
[15] Sepiashvili L, Hui A, Ignatchenko V, Shi W, Su S, Xu W, Huang SH, O'Sullivan
B, Waldron J, Irish JC, Perez-Ordonez B, Liu FF, Kislinger T. Potentially novel
candidate biomarkers for head and neck squamous cell carcinoma identified using an
integrated cell line-based discovery strategy. Molecular & cellular proteomics : MCP.
2012;11:1404-15.
[16] van der Post S, Hansson GC. Membrane Protein Profiling of Human Colon Reveals
Distinct Regional Differences. Molecular & cellular proteomics : MCP. 2014.
[17] Simabuco FM, Kawahara R, Yokoo S, Granato DC, Miguel L, Agostini M, Aragao
AZ, Domingues RR, Flores IL, Macedo CC, Della Coletta R, Graner E, Paes Leme AF.
ADAM17 mediates OSCC development in an orthotopic murine model. Molecular
cancer. 2014;13:24.
[18] Liu NQ, Braakman RB, Stingl C, Luider TM, Martens JW, Foekens JA, Umar A.
Proteomics pipeline for biomarker discovery of laser capture microdissected breast
cancer tissue. Journal of mammary gland biology and neoplasia. 2012;17:155-64.
[19] Granato DC, Zanetti MR, Kawahara R, Yokoo S, Domingues RR, Aragao AZ,
Agostini M, Carazzolle MF, Vidal RO, Flores IL, Korvala J, Cervigne NK, Silva AR, et
al. Integrated proteomics identified up-regulated focal adhesion-mediated proteins in
human squamous cell carcinoma in an orthotopic murine model. PloS one.
2014;9:e98208.
[20] Kulasingam V, Diamandis EP. Proteomics analysis of conditioned media from
three breast cancer cell lines: a mine for biomarkers and therapeutic targets. Molecular
& cellular proteomics : MCP. 2007;6:1997-2011.
[21] Pham TV, Piersma SR, Warmoes M, Jimenez CR. On the beta-binomial model for
analysis of spectral count data in label-free tandem mass spectrometry-based
proteomics. Bioinformatics. 2010;26:363-9.
[22] Christin C, Hoefsloot HC, Smilde AK, Hoekman B, Suits F, Bischoff R,
Horvatovich P. A critical assessment of feature selection methods for biomarker
discovery in clinical proteomics. Molecular & cellular proteomics : MCP. 2013;12:26376.
[23] Kim Y, Ignatchenko V, Yao CQ, Kalatskaya I, Nyalwidhe JO, Lance RS,
Gramolini AO, Troyer DA, Stein LD, Boutros PC, Medin JA, Semmes OJ, Drake RR,
et al. Identification of differentially expressed proteins in direct expressed prostatic
secretions of men with organ-confined versus extracapsular prostate cancer. Molecular
& cellular proteomics : MCP. 2012;11:1870-84.
38

[24] Rutkowski MJ, Sughrue ME, Kane AJ, Mills SA, Parsa AT. Cancer and the
complement cascade. Molecular cancer research : MCR. 2010;8:1453-65.
[25] Cho MS, Vasquez HG, Rupaimoole R, Pradeep S, Wu S, Zand B, Han HD,
Rodriguez-Aguayo C, Bottsford-Miller J, Huang J, Miyake T, Choi HJ, Dalton HJ, et al.
Autocrine effects of tumor-derived complement. Cell reports. 2014;6:1085-95.
[26] Bensimon A, Heck AJ, Aebersold R. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics and
network biology. Annual review of biochemistry. 2012;81:379-405.
[27] Bonne NJ, Wong DT. Salivary biomarker development using genomic, proteomic
and metabolomic approaches. Genome medicine. 2012;4:82.
[28] Leemans CR, Braakhuis BJ, Brakenhoff RH. The molecular biology of head and
neck cancer. Nature reviews Cancer. 2011;11:9-22.
[29] Argiris A, Karamouzis MV, Raben D, Ferris RL. Head and neck cancer. Lancet.
2008;371:1695-709.
[30] da Silva SD, Ferlito A, Takes RP, Brakenhoff RH, Valentin MD, Woolgar JA,
Bradford CR, Rodrigo JP, Rinaldo A, Hier MP, Kowalski LP. Advances and
applications of oral cancer basic research. Oral oncology. 2011;47:783-91.
[31] Macor P, Tedesco F. Complement as effector system in cancer immunotherapy.
Immunology letters. 2007;111:6-13.
[32] Bjorge L, Hakulinen J, Vintermyr OK, Jarva H, Jensen TS, Iversen OE, Meri S.
Ascitic complement system in ovarian cancer. British journal of cancer. 2005;92:895905.
[33] Kim DY, Martin CB, Lee SN, Martin BK. Expression of complement protein C5a
in a murine mammary cancer model: tumor regression by interference with the cell
cycle. Cancer immunology, immunotherapy : CII. 2005;54:1026-37.
[34] Gollapalli K, Ray S, Srivastava R, Renu D, Singh P, Dhali S, Bajpai Dikshit J,
Srikanth R, Moiyadi A, Srivastava S. Investigation of serum proteome alterations in
human glioblastoma multiforme. Proteomics. 2012;12:2378-90.
[35] Rutkowski MJ, Sughrue ME, Kane AJ, Ahn BJ, Fang S, Parsa AT. The
complement cascade as a mediator of tissue growth and regeneration. Inflammation
research : official journal of the European Histamine Research Society [et al].
2010;59:897-905.
[36] Markiewski MM, DeAngelis RA, Benencia F, Ricklin-Lichtsteiner SK, Koutoulaki
A, Gerard C, Coukos G, Lambris JD. Modulation of the antitumor immune response by
complement. Nature immunology. 2008;9:1225-35.
[37] Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation. Cell.
2011;144:646-74.
[38] Aragao AZ, Belloni M, Simabuco FM, Zanetti MR, Yokoo S, Domingues RR,
Kawahara R, Pauletti BA, Goncalves A, Agostini M, Graner E, Coletta RD, Fox JW, et
39

al. Novel processed form of syndecan-1 shed from SCC-9 cells plays a role in cell
migration. PloS one. 2012;7:e43521.
[39] Didangelos A, Yin X, Mandal K, Saje A, Smith A, Xu Q, Jahangiri M, Mayr M.
Extracellular matrix composition and remodeling in human abdominal aortic
aneurysms: a proteomics approach. Molecular & cellular proteomics : MCP.
2011;10:M111 008128.
[40] Paiva JG, Florian-Cruz L, Pedrini H, Telles GP, Minghim R. Improved similarity
trees and their application to visual data classification. IEEE transactions on
visualization and computer graphics. 2011;17:2459-68.
[41] Rousseeuw PJ. Silhouettes: A graphical aid to the interpretation and validation of
cluster analysis. Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics. 1987;20:53-65.
[42] Tibshirani R, Hastie T, Narasimhan B, Chu G. Diagnosis of multiple cancer types
by shrunken centroids of gene expression. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America. 2002;99:6567-72.
[43] Guyon IW, J.; Barnhill, S.; Vapnik, V. Gene Selection for Cancer Classification
using Support Vector Machines. Machine learning. 2002;46:389-422.
[44] Kuhn M. Building Predictive Models in R Using the caret Package. Journal of
Statistical Software. 2008;26:1-26.
[45] Smit S, Hoefsloot HC, Smilde AK. Statistical data processing in clinical
proteomics. Journal of chromatography B, Analytical technologies in the biomedical
and life sciences. 2008;866:77-88.
[46] Carazzolle MF, de Carvalho LM, Slepicka HH, Vidal RO, Pereira GA, Kobarg J,
Meirelles GV. IIS--Integrated Interactome System: a web-based platform for the
annotation, analysis and visualization of protein-metabolite-gene-drug interactions by
integrating a variety of data sources and tools. PloS one. 2014;9:e100385.
[47] Kanehisa M, Araki M, Goto S, Hattori M, Hirakawa M, Itoh M, Katayama T,
Kawashima S, Okuda S, Tokimatsu T, Yamanishi Y. KEGG for linking genomes to life
and the environment. Nucleic acids research. 2008;36:D480-4.
[48] Smoot ME, Ono K, Ruscheinski J, Wang PL, Ideker T. Cytoscape 2.8: new
features for data integration and network visualization. Bioinformatics. 2011;27:431-2.
[49] Ponten F, Schwenk JM, Asplund A, Edqvist PH. The Human Protein Atlas as a
proteomic resource for biomarker discovery. Journal of internal medicine.
2011;270:428-46.

40

FIGURE LEGENDS

Figure 1: Experimental workflow and overview of the proteomics and bioinformatics
analyses, validations and functional assays.

Figure 2: Comparison of the three feature selection methods (Beta-binomial, SVM-RFE
and NSC) used to identify differentially abundant proteins among carcinoma, melanoma
and non-cancerous cells. (A) Clustering of the whole secretome dataset before applying
feature selection methods. From the 2,574 proteins identified and quantified by spectral
counts, 1,697 (65.9%) compose the heat map. The 877 remaining proteins exhibited ≤ 2
spectral counts and were excluded from the analysis. (B) Clustering after applying
feature selection methods. 603 significant differentially abundant proteins among
melanoma, carcinoma and non-cancerous classes selected by Beta-binomial, NSC and
SVM-RFE analyses compose the heat map. (C) Venn diagram showing the intersections
among the optimal feature subsets (N) retrieved by the three methods. (D) Jaccard
similarity coefficient vs. the optimal feature subset (N) retrieved by each method. (E)
Clustering of the 12 significant differentially abundant proteins among melanoma,
carcinoma and non-cancerous classes identified in the intersection of Beta-binomial,
NSC and SVM-RFE analyses. The secretome dataset is composed by non-cancerous
cells (HaCaT and HEK293), carcinoma (A-431 and SCC-9) and melanoma (A2038 and
SK-MEL-28) cell lines.

Figure 3: Neighbor joining (NJ) clustering calculated from a Euclidean distance matrix
of the secretome dataset samples, considering (A) all features (1,697 proteins), (B)
Beta-binomial (601 proteins), (C) NSC (130 proteins) and (D) SVM-RFE (13 proteins)

41

features. SC (tree) stands for silhouette coefficient calculated from the NJ tree and SC
(data) stands for silhouette coefficient calculated directly from the original data of each
analysis.

Figure 4: Interaction networks of the identified (A) carcinoma and (B) melanoma
candidate biomarkers by Beta-binomial, NSC and SVM-RFE analyses. The selected
most relevant enriched KEGG pathways (p ≤ 0.05) among the up-regulated (red), downregulated (green), non-regulated (yellow) and background intermediary proteins (grey)
from the IIS database are depicted by clustering with a circular layout proteins involved
in each respective pathway. Clusters were assigned only to pathways containing more
than three proteins with at least one protein from the proteome dataset (disease
pathways or pathways specific for defined cell types were not considered); proteins
belonging to more than one pathway were assigned to the pathway clusters with the best
enrichment p-values; some proteins were also assigned to different pathway clusters
based on complementary data from the Uniprot database. In magenta, pathway clusters
exclusive of each network; in black, pathway clusters in common. The node sizes of up,
down and non-regulated proteins are proportional to their fold change (-1.3 ≥ fold
change ≥ 1.3, compared to the non-cancerous class). The protein-protein networks were
built using the IIS software and visualized using Cytoscape.

Figure 5: Validation of the higher expression of (A) tenascin-C and (B) GDF15 (IBenign lesion; II- Primary Melanoma; III-Metastatic Melanoma) on melanoma cancer
tissue microarrays and (C) CFB and (D) C3 (I- Normal Mucosa; II- Oral SCC) on
carcinoma cancer tissue microarrays. Tenascin-C showed statistically significant
expression among the categories benign lesion, primary melanoma and metastatic

42

melanoma, but not between primary melanoma and metastatic melanoma (One-way
ANOVA, benign lesion vs. primary melanoma, p < 0.0001; benign lesion vs. metastatic
melanoma, p < 0.0009; primary melanoma vs. metastatic melanoma, p = 0.1748).
GDF15 showed statistically significant expression among the categories benign lesion,
primary melanoma and metastatic melanoma (One-way ANOVA, benign lesion vs.
primary melanoma, p < 0.0001; benign lesion vs. metastatic melanoma, p < 0.0001;
primary melanoma vs. metastatic melanoma, p < 0.0001). CFB and C3 showed higher
expression in OSCC compared with normal mucosa (Mann Whitney U, p = 0.009 and p
= 0.0005, respectively).

Figure 6: CFB and C3 peptides showed higher normalized intensities in OSCC saliva
samples than in healthy saliva samples. PseudoSRM analytical approach for peptides of
C3 (precursor m/z 631.05, +3; 735.89, +2) and CFB (precursor m/z 638.33, +2; 939.13,
+3) normalized with 5 fmol/µl of angiotensin (m/z 432.89, +3) as an internal reference
peptide. These data represent two technical replicates of saliva samples from healthy
patients (n=7), saliva samples from patients who undergone surgical resection of OSCC
(named no lesion, n=7) and saliva samples from patients with active OSCC lesion
without any treatment (named lesion, n=10) (ANOVA followed by Tukey’s test). The
normalization to the internal reference peptide was performed for each run.

Figure 7: CFB knockdown decreased the migration of skin-derived epidermoid
carcinoma (A431) cells and reduced the chemotaxis of human macrophages. (A)
A431/untreated (mock), A431/control (scrambled) and A431/siRNA CFB cells were
seeded in serum-free media in the upper chamber of a 96-well transwell plates. RPMI
media, which was supplemented with 1% FBS, was added in the lower chamber (n=2,

43

triplicate, one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s test, * p < 0.05). (B) Chemotaxis of
human macrophages was reduced when were seeded in the upper chamber, and A431
cells treated with mock, control siRNA and siRNA against CFB were added in the
lower chamber of the transwell (n=2, triplicate, a one-way ANOVA followed by
Tukey’s test, *p < 0.05). C) Real-time quantitative PCR confirms the expression of CFB
after transient transfections in A431 cells. The data were normalized with the
(glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase gene was used as internal reference). Each
bar represents mean ± SD of three independent experiments.

44

Tables
Table 1: Number of proteins identified per experiment in each cell line.
Number of identified
Proteins by Mass Spectrometry

Cell Line
HaCaT
HEK293
A431
SCC-9
A2058
SK-MEL-28

Exp.1

Exp.2

Exp.3

2015
1690
1879
2036
1950
1660

2197
1904
1781
2213
1926
1554

2201
1861
1884
2180
1974
1770

Total

2574

Total Spectra

151,221

45

SUPPORTING INFORMATION AVAILABLE
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

SUPPLEMENTAL TABLES LEGENDS

Table S1: List of proteins identified by mass spectrometry in the conditioned media of
HaCaT, HEK293, A-431, SCC-9, A2058 and SK-MEL-28 cell lines.

Table S2: List of all identified peptide sequences by mass spectrometry in the
conditioned media of HaCaT, HEK, A431, SCC-9, A2058 and SK-MEL-28 cell lines.

Table S3: Complete ranked protein lists from carcinoma, melanoma and normal (noncancerous) cells resultant from the three feature selection methods: Beta-binomial, NSC
and SVM-RFE. The ANOVA test was also performed and the results are depicted in the
table but was not included in the pipeline.

Table S4: Statistical metrics calculated to assess the performance of SVM-RFE and
NSC models.

Table S5: Putative carcinoma and melanoma biomarkers identified by three different
methods: Beta-binomial, NSC and SVM-RFE. Dots are used to depict the
corresponding methods.

46

Table S6: Ranked protein list from OC (Organ-confined) and EC (extracapsullar)
prostate cancer cells resultant from Beta-binomial analysis.

(Kim et al., 2012,

Molecular and Cellular Proteomics)

Table S7: Ranked protein list from OC (Organ-confined) and EC (extracapsullar)
prostate cancer cells resultant from NSC analysis. (Kim et al., 2012, Molecular and
Cellular Proteomics)

Table S8: Ranked protein list from OC (Organ-confined) and EC (extracapsullar)
prostate cancer cells resultant from SVM-RFE analysis. (Kim et al., 2012, Molecular
and Cellular Proteomics)

Table S9: Protein lists retrieved from a Venn diagram analysis after OC (Organconfined) and EC (extracapsullar) prostate cancer cells selection feature analyses. Each
column shows the list corresponding to the intersection or exclusive set of the Venn
diagram. A number next to the set description correspond to the number of proteins in
each set. Highlighted proteins in yellow (Gene_Uniprot) correspond to the six candidate
biomarkers verified by different methods in the original paper by Kim et al., 2012,
Molecular and Cellular Proteomics.

Table S10: Biomarker filter analysis using Ingenuity and Human Protein Atlas applied
to the list of putative prostate cancer biomarkers (Kim et al., 2012, Molecular and
Cellular Proteomics) identified by the intersection of three different methods: Betabinomial, NSC and SVM-RFE.

47

Table S11: Enriched KEGG pathways for each protein in the carcinoma network.
Proteins for which no enriched terms were assigned are not shown. Only enriched
KEGG pathways with p≤0.05 were considered in the network analyses. Proteins were
assigned as down-, up- or non-regulated protein according to their carcinoma class
mean spectral counts vs. non-cancerous class mean spectral counts fold change (-1.3 ≥
FC ≥ 1.3).

Table S12: Enriched KEGG pathways for each protein in the melanoma network.
Proteins for which no enriched terms were assigned are not shown. Only enriched
KEGG pathways with p≤0.05 were considered in the network analyses. Proteins were
assigned as down-, up- or non-regulated according to their melanoma class mean
spectral counts vs. non-cancerous class mean spectral counts fold change (-1.3 ≥ FC ≥
1.3).

Table S13: Clinicopathological variables of the OSCC patients and healthy subjects.

Table S14: Angiotensin and spiked-in C3 and CFB peptides and transitions selected for
LC-pseudoSRM.

Table S15: Extracted ion current peak area from all MS1 and the three transitions for
each peptide using Xcalibur software.

Table S16: Normalized intensity of precursor and transitions and CV% between the
replicates.

48

Table S17: Standard curve of internal reference angiotensin peptide spiked in a 500 ng
HEK293 digest:

SUPPLEMENTAL FIGURE LEGENDS

Supplementary Figure 1: Venn diagrams illustrate the number of exclusive or shared
proteins by the cell lines of each class.

Supplementary Figure 2: Plots showing the spectral counting distribution in the
melanoma, carcinoma and non-cancerous cells for the 130 candidate biomarkers
retrieved from the NSC model.

Supplementary Figure 3: Venn diagram showing the intersections among the optimal
feature subsets (N) retrieved by four feature selection methods: the three included in the
proposed discovery-to-target pipeline and the classical ANOVA statistical test.

Supplementary Figure 4: Comparison of the three feature selection methods (Betabinomial, SVM-RFE and NSC) applied to a published dataset of OC (organ-confined)
and EC (extracapsullar) prostate cancer cells (Kim et al., 2012) to identify candidate
biomarkers between the two tumor classes. The Venn diagram shows the intersections
among the optimal feature subsets (N) retrieved by the three methods.

Supplementary Figure 5: Immunoblotting (IB) corroborates mass spectrometry (MS)
findings. The selected proteins analyzed by IB presented results comparable to the
quantification by MS (depicted as z-score-transformed heat maps). Conditioned media
from HaCaT, HEK293, A-431, SCC-9, A2058 and SK-MEL-28 cells were
49

concentrated, and 5 μg of total protein for each lane was loaded onto SDS-PAGE gels.
Then, proteins were transferred onto nitrocellulose membrane and probed with the
indicated protein antibodies.

Supplementary Figure 6: CFB and C3 peptides showed higher normalized intensity
(sum of three transitions) in OSCC saliva samples than in healthy saliva samples.
PseudoSRM approach for peptides of C3 (precursor m/z 631.05, +3; 735.89, +2) and
CFB (precursor m/z 638.33, +2; 939.13, +3) normalized to 5 fmol of angiotensin (m/z
432.89, +3) as an internal reference peptide. These data represent two technical
replicates of saliva samples from healthy patients (n=7), saliva samples from patients
who undergone surgical resection of OSCC (named no lesion, n=7) and saliva samples
from patients with active OSCC lesion without any treatment (named lesion, n=10)
(ANOVA followed by Tukey’s test). The data were normalized by dividing the targeted
angiotensin peptide peak area (sum of three transitions) by the peak area of each C3 and
CFB peptide (sum of three transitions).

Supplementary Figure 7: Standard curve for angiotensin peptide spiked at different
concentrations into the HEK293 digest. Angiotensin peptide was spiked in 500 ng of the
HEK total extract protein digest at increasing concentrations (0.01; 0.1; 1; 10 and 100
fmol/μl). Angiotensin peptide was targeted employing single ion monitoring of
precursor m/z 432.89, +3. The peptide identity was confirmed by scheduled CID
MS/MS. Each sample was run in triplicate.

50

