Articles

Soundscape Ecology: The Science
of Sound in the Landscape
Bryan C. Pijanowski, Luis J. Villanueva-Rivera, Sarah L. Dumyahn, Almo Farina, Bernie L. Krause,
Brian M. Napoletano, Stuart H. Gage, and Nadia Pieretti

Keywords: soundscapes, bioacoustics, biophony, nature deficit disorder, dawn and dusk chorus

S

ounds are a perpetual and dynamic property of all 

landscapes. The sounds of vocalizing and stridulating
animals and the nonbiological sounds of
  This article contains
running water and
sound files that may be
rustling wind emaaccessed by reading the fullnate from natural
text version of this article
landscapes. Urban
online at dx.doi.org/10.1525/
landscapes, in conbio.2011.61.3.6.
trast, are dominated
by human-produced
sounds radiating from a variety of sources, such as machines,
sirens, and the friction of tires rotating on pavement (Barber et al. 2010). Since Rachel Carson’s seminal work, Silent
Spring (1962), nature’s sounds have been inextricably linked
to environmental quality. Because sound is a fundamental
property of nature and because it can be drastically affected
by a variety of human activities, it is indeed surprising
that sound has not become a more universally appreciated
measure of a coupled natural–human system (Liu et al.
2007). To date, no coherent theory regarding the ecological
significance of all sounds emanating from a landscape exists.
Fortunately, new technologies such as automated recording devices (e.g., Acevedo and Villanueva-Rivera 2006), the
existence of inexpensive storage capabilities, developments
in acoustic data processing (e.g., Sueur et al. 2008, Trifa et al
2008), and theories of related ecological disciplines such as
landscape ecology (Forman and Godron 1981, Urban et al.
1987, Turner 1989, Turner et al. 2001, Farina 2006) have
advanced sufficiently to allow research on the ecological
significance of sounds in landscapes to progress.

The purpose of this article is to present a new field of
study called soundscape ecology, emphasizing the ecological
characteristics of sounds and their spatial-temporal patterns
as they emerge from landscapes. We believe that soundscape
ecology shares considerable parallels with landscape ecology
(Forman and Godron 1981, Urban et al. 1987, Turner 1989,
Turner et al. 2001, Farina 2006), because processes occurring
within landscapes can be tightly linked to and reflected in
patterns of sounds in landscapes.
To illustrate the main themes of this relatively unexplored
field, we introduce new terms and a conceptual framework
for soundscape ecology, summarize what is known about
sounds in the environment, and present overviews of four
case studies that quantify soundscape dynamics. We conclude with an argument for the need to conserve natural
soundscapes. This article also represents an innovation in
presentation; we introduce sound recordings as an integral component of the article. All acoustic recordings used
in this article as single demonstrations and many others
used in our analyses may be accessed online in two places:
(1) by reading the full-text version of this article online (dx.
doi.org/10.1525/bio.2011.61.3.6); and (2) at our own selfhosted site (www.purdue.edu/soundscapes/bioscience), which
features additional Web tools for learning.
What is soundscape ecology?
The term “soundscape” has been used by a variety of disciplines to describe the relationship between a landscape
and the composition of its sound. The work of Southworth
(1969) exemplifies one of the first uses of the term in the
literature. Southworth was interested in urban soundscapes;

BioScience 61: 203–216. ISSN 0006-3568, electronic ISSN 1525-3244. © 2011 by American Institute of Biological Sciences. All rights reserved. Request
permission to photocopy or reproduce article content at the University of California Press’s Rights and Permissions Web site at www.ucpressjournals.com/
reprintinfo.asp. doi:10.1525/bio.2011.61.3.6

www.biosciencemag.org 	

March 2011 / Vol. 61 No. 3 • BioScience 203

Downloaded from http://bioscience.oxfordjournals.org/ at FMRP/USP/BIBLIOTECA CENTRAL on April 24, 2014

This article presents a unifying theory of soundscape ecology, which brings the idea of the soundscape—the collection of sounds that emanate
from landscapes—into a research and application focus. Our conceptual framework of soundscape ecology is based on the causes and consequences of biological (biophony), geophysical (geophony), and human-produced (anthrophony) sounds. We argue that soundscape ecology shares
many parallels with landscape ecology, and it should therefore be considered a branch of this maturing field. We propose a research agenda for
soundscape ecology that includes six areas: (1) measurement and analytical challenges, (2) spatial-temporal dynamics, (3) soundscape linkage to
environmental covariates, (4) human impacts on the soundscape, (5) soundscape impacts on humans, and (6) soundscape impacts on ecosystems.
We present case studies that illustrate different approaches to understanding soundscape dynamics. Because soundscapes are our auditory link to
nature, we also argue for their protection, using the knowledge of how sounds are produced by the environment and humans.

Articles

204 BioScience • March 2011 / Vol. 61 No. 3	

www.biosciencemag.org

Downloaded from http://bioscience.oxfordjournals.org/ at FMRP/USP/BIBLIOTECA CENTRAL on April 24, 2014

in particular, his work addressed how the sounds of the
composition of all sounds heard at a location that are biobuilt environment enhanced people’s perception of space
logical, geological, or anthropogenic. Another rich area of
and their relationship to the activities occurring within citacoustics research has focused on noise in the environment.
ies. As a result, the first mention of soundscapes appears
Primarily in the field of engineering, significant research
in urban planning literature. Nearly a decade later, Schafer
has addressed the physics of sound (e.g., Hartmann 1997),
(1977) recognized that sounds are ecological properties
and new methods have been employed to calculate noise
of landscapes, referring to soundscapes as “the acoustical
produced from planes and automobiles across large regions
characteristics of an area that reflect natural processes.” His
(Miller 2008).
primary interest was in characterizing
natural sounds that could be used to
Conceptual framework for
“Over increasingly large areas of the United
compose music. Krause (1987) later
soundscape ecology
attempted to describe the complex arSince its conception, landscape ecolStates, spring now comes unheralded by the
rangement of biological sounds and
ogy has focused on the interaction of
return of the birds, and the early mornings
other ambient sounds occurring at a
pattern and ecological processes across
site, and introduced the terms “biolarge spatial regions (Urban et al. 1987,
are strangely silent where once they were
phony” to describe the composition
Turner 1989, Turner et al. 2001, Farina
filled with the beauty of bird song.”
of sounds created by organisms and
2006). Many of the basic principles
“geophony” to describe nonbiological
of soundscape ecology are common
— Rachel Carson, Silent Spring (1962)
ambient sounds of wind, rain, thunder,
to those of landscape ecology. These
and so on. We extend this taxonomy of
include the assignment of a soundsounds to include “anthrophony”—those caused by humans.
scape to a geographic context, the identification of anthroSoundscape ecology thus can be described by our working
pogenic and biological processes and spectral and temporal
definition as all sounds, those of biophony, geophony, and
patterns in the soundscape, how disturbance alters patterns
anthrophony, emanating from a given landscape to create
and processes across scales, the emphasis on interactions beunique acoustical patterns across a variety of spatial and
tween biological and anthropogenic factors, how organisms
temporal scales.
perceive spatial configuration in landscapes, and the need to
At the onset, we wish to separate other acoustic studies
develop tools to quantify pattern.
from what we believe is a unique field of acoustics presented
Our general conceptual framework (figure 1) bases
here. To our knowledge, soundscape ecology has not been
soundscape ecology on the same foundations as landscape
used in the literature to describe a field of ecology. Acoustic
ecology and draws from areas of coupled natural–human
ecology, as introduced by Schafer (1977) and Truax (1999),
systems (Liu et al. 2007), with natural and human systems
is seen as complementary to traditional ecological concepts
interacting to form spatial-temporal patterning of sound
rather than situated within them. Broadly interdisciplinary,
in landscapes. Humans transform landscapes (Lambin and
acoustic ecology studies the relationships and interactions
Geist 2006) through land-use and land-cover change (figamong humans and sounds in an environment, includure 1, arrow 1), and these human modifications of the land
ing musical orchestrations, aural awareness, and acoustic
interact with a variety of biophysical features (e.g., terrain,
design (Schafer 1977, Truax 1999). Acoustic ecology largely
soils) to produce heterogeneity in spatial structure across
emphasizes
human-centered
inquiry rather than the larger
socioecological systems approach
taken here.
Bioacoustics (Fletcher 2007)
is another related research
area that we distinguish from
soundscape ecology. The study
of animal communication is a
rich and mature field, spanning
behavior, life-history theory, and
the physics of sound production
by animals. However, a majority of these studies focus on a
single species or a comparison
of species. Our presentation
of soundscape ecology focuses
mostly on macro or community
Figure 1. Conceptual framework for soundscape ecology.
acoustics. We are interested in the

Articles
works (Wrightson 2000). As such, many policies have been
enacted to control noise. For example, the importance of
sounds in national parks was identified early on with the
increasing volume of motorized recreation (National Parks
Overflight Act of 1987). The National Park Service (NPS)
formally recognizes soundscapes as a park resource, and
that the organization should “restore to the natural condition wherever possible those park soundscapes that have
become degraded by unnatural sounds (noise), and will
protect natural soundscapes from unacceptable impacts”
(NPS 2006, p. 56).
In the opposing direction, soundscapes can influence
human well-being (figure 1, arrow 7). As with other natural resources, natural and unique soundscapes have many
associated human ideals, such as cultural, sense of place,
recreational, therapeutic, educational, research, artistic, and
aesthetic values. Many of these values foster a conservation
ethic by directly influencing people’s ability to connect with
the natural world (Rolston 1988). Indeed, the NPS recognizes
the importance of healthy soundscapes for positive park visitor experiences (Miller 2008). Natural sounds engage one of
our senses and provide information about our surroundings.
Wilson (1999) suggested that the natural world is the most
information-rich environment that humans can experience,
and we believe that some of the important information conveyed is through sound. In contrast, urban soundscapes are
described as containing little acoustic information (Schafer
1977), reinforcing a growing disconnect between humans
and nature (Louv 2008). Therefore, the sounds of an environment should not be something that we try to block out,
but rather something that we value.

Figure 2. Spectrogram of an 11-second recording of the dawn chorus at the La Selva Biological Station, Costa Rica. Birds and
insects are creating a variety of sounds from 1 kilohertz (kHz) to some even above 12 kHz. There is considerable biophonic
activity between 4 and 6 kHz, with the loudest sounds occurring 1 second into this recording. Crickets are stridulating at 4.7, 5.3,
and 6.0 kHz. Note that raindrops falling from the tropical canopy can be heard (sounds below 2 kHz), an example of geophony.
www.biosciencemag.org 	

March 2011 / Vol. 61 No. 3 • BioScience 205

Downloaded from http://bioscience.oxfordjournals.org/ at FMRP/USP/BIBLIOTECA CENTRAL on April 24, 2014

the landscape (Farina 2006). Landscape structure in turn
(figure 1, arrow 2) influences the distribution and abundance of species and their interactions at multiple spatial
and temporal scales (MacArthur and MacArthur 1961).
Landforms (e.g., valleys, rivers) also provide for types of
geophysical motion patterns, especially those that make
frequent sounds such as water and wind. Furthermore, climate (figure 1, arrow 3) controls the distribution of species
(Currie 1991) in conjunction with the timing of specific
life-history events (e.g., breeding or the emergence of noisy
insects; e.g., Brown et al. 1999, Beebee 2002, Ahola et al.
2004). Climate (arrow 3) also influences geophonic sounds.
The natural components of biophony and geophony (both
as arrow 4) at any given location and time contribute to the
observed soundscape. Human activities produce sounds
(anthrophony) as well (arrow 5). Biophony, geophony, and
anthrophony (arrows 4 and 5) integrate to create the complete soundscape. What occurs in the soundscape can feed
back to natural processes (arrow 6); for example, animal
vocalizations masked by human-generated noise may alter
population or community dynamics such as predator-prey
relationships (Barber et al. 2009).
Our conceptual framework for soundscapes also emphasizes two unidirectional components between humans and
soundscapes (figure 1, arrows 5 and 7); such feedbacks
characterize coupled natural–human systems (Liu et al.
2007). In the direction of humans to soundscapes (arrow 5),
anthropogenic sounds often permeate natural landscapes.
Unwanted sound, or noise, is a common issue in cities globally, and the problem has spread to more rural and remote
areas with the expansion of motorized transportation net-

Articles
Sound in the environment
There are many ways to quantify sounds in the environment.
Measuring sound.  Soundscapes can be measured using

Relevant ecological hypotheses.  Two complementary
hypotheses, the morphological adaptation hypothesis
(MAH) and the acoustic adaptation hypothesis (AAH),
describe how ecological feedback mechanisms give rise
to changes in animal signals, whereas the acoustic niche
hypothesis (ANH) describes how these feedback mechanisms lead to the complex arrangement of signals in the
soundscape. The MAH focuses on the sender, and posits
that an organism’s physical attributes, such as its body
size, the length of its trachea, and the structure of its
beak, influence what sorts of sound signals an organism
can produce (e.g., Bennet-Clark 1998). A larger bird with
a longer trachea, such as a heron or a goose, will usually
produce sounds at lower frequencies than a smaller
bird with a shorter trachea, such as a thrush or a finch.

Biophysical models of sound transmission.  Biologists have

invested significant effort into understanding animal
communication, and their findings offer insight into the
soundscape’s role in ecological communities. Much of the
research into animal acoustic communication (e.g., Marten
et al. 1977) has utilized the Sender-Propagation-Receiver
(SPR) model to describe the three primary elements of
information propagation: (1) the sender’s biophysical characteristics and the intent of its message, (2) the role of the
physical environment in shaping the signal, and (3) the
perception and interpretation of the signal by its recipient
(figure 3a). The sender encodes a string of information
into a sound signal that is composed of certain physical
factors, including the signal’s (a) frequency, (b) energy or
amplitude, (c) directionality, and (d) the point (or points,
if the sender is in motion) of origin. The propagation of
the signal depends both on the medium through which it
passes (air, water, solid media, etc.) and on the arrangement of reflective and absorptive surfaces of that medium
(e.g., vegetation, buildings, and water bodies). Finally, the
signal the receiver interprets will be further influenced by
that receiver’s hearing range and its ability to translate the
signal back into information (Forrest 1994). Although most
organisms cannot actively control which sound signals they
receive, selection pressures can adjust the configuration of
their auditory organs to optimize their ability to detect conspecific signals (Dooling et al. 1992).
206 BioScience • March 2011 / Vol. 61 No. 3	

Figure 3. Sound transmission models for (a) single and
(b) multiple sources of sound.
www.biosciencemag.org

Downloaded from http://bioscience.oxfordjournals.org/ at FMRP/USP/BIBLIOTECA CENTRAL on April 24, 2014

automated digital recording systems. Digital acoustic
recorders store the timing and intensity (or power) of
the sounds detected by microphones, which allows signal
processors to reconstruct the frequency distribution of signal
intensity over time. Intensity is most commonly recorded
as dB (decibels), although digital recorders store amplitude
in dBFS (or decibels full scale); the peak is assigned a value
of dBFS = 0, and all other values scale on the basis of the bit
value of the recording. Humans tend to interpret frequency
as pitch (although the relationship is not one to one) and ideally can detect signals with frequencies ranging from 20 hertz
(Hz) to 20 kilohertz (kHz). Many digital sound recorders
sample at 44.1 kHz with a 16-bit depth, which is CD quality,
and store the data as uncompressed WAVE (or WAV) files.
Figure 2 shows a visual representation, called a spectrogram, of a 10-second recording from the La Selva Biological Reserve in Costa Rica (for reference, listen to sound file
1). This spectrogram contains three dimensions of sound:
(1) time, along the x axis; (2) frequency, represented along the
y axis; and (3) energy, also called amplitude, normally color
coded or plotted on the z axis. Reading a spectrogram, also
called a sonogram, is done in the same way that one reads
sheet music: Notes are arranged linearly through time with
higher frequencies (or pitch) at the top of the musical staff.

A multisource model is illustrated in figure 3b. Note that
sounds from birds and amphibians may be interfered with by
wind, rushing water, or potentially noise created by humans
(Ryan and Brenowitz 1985). The integration of all these signals, natural and human, makes up the soundscape. Note also
that an acoustic sensor array could be employed to record
sounds at multiple locations; sound waves could then be conceptualized as an acoustic field that changes with time.

Articles
prompt organisms to adjust their signals to exploit vacant
niches in the auditory spectrum to minimize spectral or
temporal overlaps in interspecific vocalizations. Ficken
and colleagues (1974), for instance, observed that least flycatchers (Empidonax minimus) at Lake Itasca, Minnesota,
would insert their shorter songs between the longer songs
of red-eyed vireos (Vireo olivaceus) when the two species
shared the same habitat. An important prediction that
follows from this hypothesis is that less-disturbed habitats with unaltered species assemblages will exhibit higher
levels of coordination between interspecific vocalizations
than more heavily disturbed habitats, in which species
assemblages were recently altered. Likewise, invasive species could create biophonic disturbances, thereby altering
natural acoustic partitioning (figure 4, sound files 2–4).
Finally, Farina and Belgrano’s (2006) eco-field hypothesis
can be used to describe the soundscape from the receiver’s
perspective as a carrier of meaning. This hypothesis
proposes that an organism uses the signs it identifies in

Figure 4. Spectrograms of two endemic birds, Turdus merula (a) and Sylvia atricapilla (b), and the nonendemic,
invasive Leiothrix lutea (c). Note that L. lutea and T. merula have overlapping frequencies in their songs, especially
around 2 kilohertz (kHz), which are the loudest parts of their calls. Sylvia atricapilla sings at higher frequencies that are
potentially masked by L. lutea, which has many parts of its song in high frequencies (> 6 kHz) and with clear modulation
patterns. Leiothrix lutea has more behavioral overlap with S. atricapilla than it does with T. merula.
www.biosciencemag.org 	

March 2011 / Vol. 61 No. 3 • BioScience 207

Downloaded from http://bioscience.oxfordjournals.org/ at FMRP/USP/BIBLIOTECA CENTRAL on April 24, 2014

The AAH (e.g., Daniel and Blumstein 1998) focuses on
interactions between the sender and the medium, and
proposes that certain groups of organisms will adjust the
attributes of their sounds to maximize their propagation
(Morton 1975). Support for the AAH has been mixed;
some researchers found no correlation between signal
composition and habitat (Daniel and Blumstein 1998),
whereas others (e.g., Brown et al. 1995) found evidence
that the acoustic properties of an environment can influence the evolution of vocalizations.
In his formulation of the ANH, Krause (1987) pointed
out that both the morphological and the behavioral
adaptations described by the MAH and the AAH can also
be triggered by interspecific interference when organisms’ calls contain similar frequency and timing features.
After repeatedly observing complex arrangements of
nonoverlapping signals in his recordings of soundscapes
in multiple habitat types, Krause (1987) postulated that
such interspecific competition for auditory space would

Articles
the soundscape to construct a cognitive template that it
then uses to match particular spatial configurations with
life functions such as food, water, and shelter.

208 BioScience • March 2011 / Vol. 61 No. 3	

Rhythms of nature.  The sounds of nature contain numer-

ous rhythms or cycles. Many recognized temporal cycles
of communication occur in terrestrial animals, the most
well studied being those of birds, amphibians, and insects.
Collectively, we refer to these periodic acoustic patterns
as “the rhythms of nature.” Most songbirds are known to
begin singing at the same time each year (Saunders 1947),
and these birds sing most intensely early in the morning
(Kacelnik and Krebs 1982) and late evening (referred to as
the dawn and dusk chorus, respectively). Dawn chorus in
birds is thought to occur when individuals, arriving back to
their territory, use songs to advertise their presence (Staicer
et al. 1996). This circadian pattern of singing in birds, the
timing of which is largely affected by weather and climatic
conditions, strongly correlates with sunrise and sunset and
becomes more pronounced with the onset of breeding and
migration.
A research agenda for soundscape ecology
We believe that we are now well poised to place soundscape ecology into a more research and application focus.
Research is needed in several new areas, organized around
the following main themes: measurement and quantification, spatial-temporal dynamics, environmental covariates,
www.biosciencemag.org

Downloaded from http://bioscience.oxfordjournals.org/ at FMRP/USP/BIBLIOTECA CENTRAL on April 24, 2014

What produces sound?  The urban environment generally contains sounds with considerably different spectral and temporal properties from those produced by living organisms.
Urban landscapes are saturated with signals that carry little
or no intentional information and are regarded as unwanted
noise by many people. These signals emanate from vehicles
(e.g., motors and road noise) and stationary machines (e.g.,
air conditioners; sound file 5). Most of these sounds occur at
low acoustic frequencies (less than 4 kHz).
The geophysical environment produces a variety of in situ,
contextual ambient sounds. Familiar such sounds are wind,
rain, and running water, the frequencies of which occur
between 100 Hz and 1 kHz with little rain, or between
100 Hz to 8 kHz during windy or moderate to heavy rain.
Geophony varies seasonally and diurnally.
Among terrestrial organisms, vertebrates and certain
groups of insects produce the most sound. The most audible
insects are crickets, katydids, grasshoppers, and cicadas.
Insects produce sounds most strongly around 3 to 4 kHz and
6 to 8 kHz, either through stridulation (crickets and katydids)
or by vibrating a rigid membrane (cicadas). Stridulation is
created by insects by rubbing body parts together. Insects
call during the day (cicadas), at night (crickets), or both
(some cicadas). Additionally, songs from many insects possess a certain periodicity. For example, sounds from crickets
are composed of pulses and chirps produced at precise intervals, and crickets are well known for having chirp rates that
are strongly influenced by temperature (Walker 1962). Other
cyclical patterns of sound production in insects throughout
the year relate to the phenological life cycle of the species.
Annual cicadas (Tibicen spp.), for instance, will sing during hot days, late in the summer after they emerge from
the ground, with the timing of emergence being a function
of accumulated heating degree days (Williams and Simon
1995). Sounds produced from wing beats from flies, bees,
and wasps could contribute significantly to the soundscapes
if these insects are present in large numbers.
Amphibians such as frogs and toads rely primarily on
vocalizations to attract mates (Gerhardt 1994). In the northern
temperate regions of eastern North America, spring peepers
(Pseudacris crucifer) are common singers at night in wetlands
and ponds. Calls are intense during the breeding seasons, which
extend from late winter (February) to early spring (May) in the
northern United States and from late fall (October) to early
spring (March) in more southern locations. Frequencies of
frog and toad choruses range from 2 to 5 kHz.
Almost all birds use sound to attract mates, defend territories, sound alarms, and communicate other types of
information. Many of the passerines are especially known
for producing elaborate songs (Kroodsma 2005). Most songs
and calls produced by birds occur in the 2 to 6 kHz range.
The acoustic frequency of a bird’s song relates to its body

size (large-bodied birds produce sounds as low as 1 kHz) and
habitat type and structure; for example, some tropical birds
use protracted pure tones in environments with persistent
geophonic sounds of wind and rain, and some vocalizations
reach frequencies in the 10 to 12 kHz range (Kerry Rabenold,
Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, West
Lafayette, Indiana, personal communication, 5 October 2010).
A variety of terrestrial mammals also produce sounds
(McComb and Reby 2005). Groups that are frequent contributors of sound produced in landscapes include primates
(e.g., monkeys, baboons), elephants, canines (e.g., wolves
and coyotes), rodents (e.g., squirrels, chipmunks), and
felines (e.g., lions), among others. Bats generally produce
two types of sound; the first, referred to as “echolocation,”
is emitted as ultrasonic frequencies (above human hearing
ability) and is used to locate prey. The second, communication calls, are more readily audible to humans and are used
to identify individuals.
Recently, considerable evidence has emerged showing
that anthrophony can influence animal communication
in a variety of ways. For example, American robins (Turdus migratorius) shift the timing of their singing in urban
environments to the night (Fuller et al. 2007). In song sparrows (Melospiza melodia), the lowest-frequency notes were
higher in environments with high ambient noise (Wood
and Yezerinac 2006). Brumm (2004) found that freeranging nightingales (Luscinia megarhynchos) in noisier
environments sing more loudly than those in quieter environments, and Slabbekoorn and Peet (2003) determined
that the great tit (Parus major) sings at higher pitches in
urban noise conditions.

Articles
human impacts on soundscapes, soundscape impacts on
humans, and soundscape impacts on wildlife.
Theme 1: Improve the measurement and quantification of
sounds.  Acoustic sensors are needed that can automate the

Theme 2: Improve our understanding of spatial-temporal dynamics
across different scales.  Research is needed on how soundscapes

vary with landscape patterns and processes (figure 1, arrows
1 and 2). How do soundscapes differ with land-use patterns?
Comparisons of soundscape dynamics should be made of
various natural ecosystems around the world but also across
areas that differ in the amount of human disturbance within
an ecosystem. Vertebrate species richness has been shown
to vary with vegetation structure (canopy height, density).
Is soundscape diversity greatest where vegetation structure
is most complex? More research is needed that attempts to
characterize the different types of the temporal patterns of
soundscapes. How do soundscapes vary over different time
frames (seconds, minutes, hours, diurnally, annually) (figure
1, arrows 4 and 5) in different landscapes? How are the dawn
and dusk choruses affected by human activities?
Theme 3: Improve our understanding of how important environmental covariates impact sound.  Biophonic and geophonic

sounds very likely vary according to many environmental
factors, such as weather, plant phenology, and elevation.
Specific research is needed on how soundscapes vary by
temperature (air, soil, and water), solar radiation, lunar
radiation, relative humidity, heating degree days, and moisture budgets (figure 1, arrow 4). Knowledge of these covariates will be necessary as researchers attempt to understand
how human activity impacts natural soundscape dynamics.
Studies on how geophonic sounds of wind, running water,
and rain affect biophonic patterns will help us to understand
the plasticity of biological communication as it relates to
human-generated sounds.
Theme 4: Assess the impact of soundscapes on wildlife.  There is a
need for more research on how certain soundscape qualities
www.biosciencemag.org 	

Theme 5: Assess the impacts of humans on soundscapes.  Humans
create many objects that produce sounds (figure 1, arrow
5). How do engines, road noises, bells, sirens, and other
machines affect soundscape composition? As new technologies emerge, how do these affect the soundscape? What policies are needed to protect soundscapes in various settings
such as national parks or our cities and neighborhoods?
How can land-use planners and policymakers determine
future soundscapes?
Theme 6: Assess soundscape impacts on humans.  Humans
are surrounded by sounds that emanate from the environment and these sensory connections to nature are from the
soundscape (figure 1, arrow 7). Research is needed on how
natural sounds influence the development of individuals’
sense of place, place attachment, and connection to nature.
More specifically, how do human demographic variables
such as culture, place of residence, or age affect the strength
of human values associated with soundscapes? What factors
affect human (in)tolerance of soundscape changes, especially where those changes increase noise?

Soundscape ecology case studies
We present four case studies that illustrate various aspects of
soundscape ecology. These studies also exemplify the kinds
of research that can be conducted across the six research
themes posed above. The first case study, which is not a separate study in itself as are the three others, represents selected
recordings from the massive Krause 40-year-old soundscape
archive. Krause, a musician and recording engineer, has
recorded natural sounds for use in the entertainment industry. The second focuses on characterizing the “rhythms of
nature” in midlatitude landscapes that vary across a human
disturbance gradient. A third study, conducted in Sequoia
National Park in the United States, attempts to determine
whether organisms are partitioning their sounds and the
extent to which geophonic sounds, such as rivers and wind,
interfere with animal communication. The final study, conducted in montane forests in Tuscany, Italy, centers on mapping dynamic soundscapes.
Krause ambient sounds soundscape archive.  We use sev-

eral field recordings that are part of the massive Krause
soundscape archive to illustrate how sounds reflect certain characteristics of landscapes and the organisms that
live within them. A 1-minute-28-second recording of a
tropical forest in Madagascar in 1996 (sound file 6) represents an excellent example of the ANH, exemplifying
March 2011 / Vol. 61 No. 3 • BioScience 209

Downloaded from http://bioscience.oxfordjournals.org/ at FMRP/USP/BIBLIOTECA CENTRAL on April 24, 2014

recording of sounds, that are inexpensive, and that can be
placed in large networks in hostile environments. Research is
required that can automatically differentiate all sounds emanating from landscapes. For example, researchers need tools
that can classify biological, geophysical, and anthropogenic
sources of sounds. Scientists also need a better understanding of how these sources of sounds differ in their composition. How do anthrophonic sounds differ in composition
(acoustic frequency, time interval) from biophonic sounds?
Is the presence of certain kinds of sounds indicative of a
healthy or deteriorating landscape? In situ measurements of
biodiversity need to be compared with soundscape measures
to determine how well vocal organisms provide a proxy for
biodiversity in general. Research in this area can also advance
our ability to use soundscape measures for natural resource
management and biological conservation.

(e.g., noise, ambient sounds like running water and wind)
affect individual wildlife species and populations (figure 1,
arrow 6). Research is required on the ways anthrophony affects
wildlife behavior, such as breeding, predator-prey relationships, and physiology. As soundscape patterns such as signal
composition, sound diversity, and temporal cycles change,
what are the impacts to species’ life-history patterns?

Articles

210 BioScience • March 2011 / Vol. 61 No. 3	

www.biosciencemag.org

Downloaded from http://bioscience.oxfordjournals.org/ at FMRP/USP/BIBLIOTECA CENTRAL on April 24, 2014

that sounds produced by animals are separated in space,
the human ear but are known to occur continuously in ant
time, and frequency. Here, dozens of birds vocalize with
colonies. Recent research (Hickling and Brown 2000) has also
little frequency or temporal overlap. One bird (probably a
shown that only sounds produced in a near field on the order
sickle-billed vanga, Falculea palliata) produces four rapid
of 100 millimeters or less are detected by ants, and ambient
calls followed by a brief pause at 1 kHz, much below the
sounds produced farther away are ignored.
frequency of other bird vocalizations. This recording
Sounds produced by many organisms may also reflect the
most likely represents some of the greatest acoustic niche
animals’ complex social structure. The recording (sound file
separation in the world.
10) of gray wolves (Canis lupus) in Canada’s Algonquin ProThe nighttime recording of organisms producing sounds in
vincial Park in 2008 captures the vocalizations of wolves as
a bai in the Central African Republic (sound file 7) illustrates
the normal foreground biophony progresses. This recording
how unique landscapes can create unique soundscapes. Here,
may also elicit a strong sense of wildness, triggering many
the normal synchronous production of nighttime sounds by
human senses and values. The entire context of wolves howlinsects and frogs is interwoven with the loud trumpeting, beling among the tapestry of boreal sounds can be a memorable
lowing, and grunting of forest elephants (Loxodonta cyclotis).
experience (sensu Fisher 1998), emphasizing the importance
A bai is a special landscape where forest elephants go (areas
of our auditory connection with nature.
have been cleared by elephants) because of the high salt content of the mud surrounding ponds created by groundwater
Tippecanoe Rhythms of Nature study.  Several of this article’s
upwelling; thus, landscape structure and the specific animals
authors (LJV, BCP, and BMN) conducted a yearlong study to
occupying these areas can create a unique soundscape.
measure near-continuous sounds in a variety of landscapes
A recording (sound file 8) of the dawn chorus in
in northwestern Tippecanoe County, Indiana (see online
Zimbabwe illustrates not only the complexity of sounds
supplementary material at www.jstor.org/stable/10.1525/
produced in the morning but also animals’ use of special
bio.2011.61.3.6), in order to characterize different rhythms
landforms to propagate calls. The first minute contains
of nature and the impacts of humans on them. We deployed
a typical chorusing of about 30 different species of birds
automated Wildlife Acoustics Songmeters in eight locations
(see supplementary online materials at www.jstor.org/
that varied in land-use characteristics, spanning old growth
stable/10.1525/bio.2011.61.3.6). At 1:13 into this recordforest to agricultural fields (figure 5). The proportion of
ing, however, baboons (Papio
cynocephalus) begin to bark.
Note how the echo decay of the
baboons (> 4 seconds) differs
from the echo decay of the birds
(approximately one-third of a
second), such as the black-eyed
bulbul (Pycnonotus barbatus) in
the dry forest. The landform is
thus exploited by these animals
to propagate their voices. Many
animals, such as African lions
(Panthera leo), forest and plains
elephants, and hyenas, choose
the time and place to make their
voices echo.
Wiens and Milne (1989), among
others, have emphasized the need
to understand landscapes from
the perspective of the size of an
organism; they found that from a
beetle’s point of view, the very fine
Figure 5. Land-use and land-cover composition within 100 meters of each acoustic
structure of a landscape influences
recorder. Land-use and -cover data were from the 30-meter 2001 National Land
movement patterns. Additionally,
Cover Database, classified into major land-use and -cover types. Martell Forest
many insects produce sounds that
is a secondary forest owned by Purdue University, the Wildlife Area is a wetland
aid in breeding or communicasurrounded by 10- to 15-year-old trees, Ross Reserve is an old growth forest also
tion that may not be audible to
owned by Purdue University. FNR Farm and McCormick Woods are two mixedhumans or to other organisms in
use sites; the former is an abandoned orchard and McCormick Woods is a small
the landscape. Ant stridulations
(40-hectare) forest stand surrounded by residential urban development.
(sound file 9) are not audible to

Articles
a yearlong study to determine whether (a) sounds from
animals occurred with any acoustic niche separation, and
(b) geophony affected biophony patterns. A forest riparian
zone (near a relatively noisy stream), an oak savanna, a dry
savanna chaparral (with high winds), and an old-growth
forest site were monitored daily at dawn, midday, dusk,
and midnight (for 60 minutes during the period of September 2001 through October 2002) using digital acoustic
recorders (see supplementary online materials for details).
Randomly selected 11.5-second segments were analyzed by
Downloaded from http://bioscience.oxfordjournals.org/ at FMRP/USP/BIBLIOTECA CENTRAL on April 24, 2014

urban and agriculture within 100 meters of the recorder
was used as a measure of human disturbance. We collected
and analyzed more than 34,000 15-minute recordings.
We were also interested in applying metrics traditionally
used by ecologists, such as diversity, evenness, richness,
and dominance. To accomplish this, we discretized the
spectrogram into 10 frequency bands and calculated the
amount of sound occurring in each band. We used these
values to calculate (a) diversity (using Shannon’s index) and
(b) evenness (using the Gini coefficient). We also determined the most dominant frequency band occurring in each
15-minute recording. The total
amount of acoustic activity in
each recording was used as a surrogate for sound sources, which
in some cases will be correlated
to species richness. These metrics
were examined across landscapes
and over two time periods.
Activity, diversity, and evenness were greatest for the natural
landscapes (forests and wetlands),
and all values decreased as human
disturbance increased (figure 6).
A plot of mean monthly Shannon’s diversity index values by
site (figure 7a) shows that a peak
in entropy occurs during the late
summer. Late summer soundscapes are composed of birds
and insects (mostly cicadas and
crickets). Comparing these same
sites across time of day (figure 7b)
aggregated from May through
September, a 7:00 a.m. (i.e., dawn
chorus) and 10:00 p.m. peak (i.e.,
dusk chorus) are evident in all
but the agricultural sites. Nighttime entropy values are twice
that of midday values in all sites
except the cornfield site. Sound
files 11–34 contain a full day of
recording from our wetland site.
In May, all sites were dominated by
low-frequency sounds (figure 8),
but by late summer (August and
September) bands 3 through 8
became prominent, especially in
natural landscapes.
Sequoia National Park acoustic niche
hypothesis study.  Four relatively

pristine habitats located in the
Sequoia National Park were selected
by BK and SHG (see figure 9) for
www.biosciencemag.org 	

Figure 6. Annual average values for (a) total activity, (b) frequency band diversity,
and (c) frequency band evenness in the Tippecanoe Rhythms of Nature Study.
March 2011 / Vol. 61 No. 3 • BioScience 211

Articles

Mapping the soundscapes in the Tuscany study.  A two-month

Figure 7. Temporal cycles of frequency band diversity
plotted by (a) month and (b) hour. (a) Monthly average
frequency band diversity (Shannon’s) as it differs between
sites and (b) hourly average frequency band diversity
(Shannon’s) as it differs between sites.
examining spectrograms and listening to the recordings.
A total of 190 spectrograms were produced, and the vocal
niches in these spectrograms were analyzed (a) qualitatively, by describing biophonic and geophonic patterns;
and (b) quantitatively, by calculating the acoustic activity
occurring at each site.
The vocalizations of American robins and the American
dippers (Cinclus mexicanus) in the riparian zone (Buckeye
Flats) location were evident, with frequencies of songs
occurring in a manner that avoided masking by the nearby
noisy stream. Insects produced sounds that were higher in
pitch than birds, demonstrating niche partitioning. Only
57% of the spectrograms contained sounds. Within the
oak savanna site (Sycamore Creek), vocalizations by birds
ranged from 500 Hz (mourning dove, Zenaida macroura)
to more than 20 kHz (unidentified bird); approximately
94% of the spectrogram was occupied by at least one vocal
organism. The dry savanna chaparral (Shepard’s Saddle)
212 BioScience • March 2011 / Vol. 61 No. 3	

study was conducted from June to July of 2008 in a secondary montane beech forest in the Italian Apennine National
Park, located along the northern slopes of Mount La Nuda.
The study was conducted to determine how spatially variable
soundscapes are in a relatively homogenous forest. Twenty
digital recorders (Handy Recorder, H4) were placed in a
5 × 4 grid with 100-meter spacing. Eleven three-hour recordings (0600 to 0900) were collected under ideal meteorological
conditions. Approximately 13 species of birds, such as the
European robin (Erithacus rubecula), the chaffinch (Fringilla
coelebs), and the blackcap (Sylvia atricapilla), vocalize in this
forest (sample in sound file 39). An acoustic complexity index
(see supplementary online materials) was used to quantify
spectral complexity, and interpolation software was used to
create soundscape maps.
Data from the acoustic recorders were used to construct
soundtopes (Farina 2006)—a three-dimensional map of
acoustic complexity (y axis) plotted across the landscape
(plotted across the x and z axes). The 11 daily soundscape
maps for this landscape (figure 10) indicate that large
interseasonal changes of the soundscape occur. We anticipated that the soundscape maps would be similar throughout the year, reflecting static territorial boundaries. The
breeding period of every species has a different phenological
time and for each time requires specific resources (food,
shelter, singing spots, etc.), these resources are spatially and
temporally variable as well. The soundtope shifts across the
environment consequently.
Summary of case studies.  The above case studies illustrate

various ways that data can be collected, analyzed, and
interpreted. These case studies highlight many of the
research themes described above. The Krause archive
demonstrates the complex composition of a community
of organism vocalizations, the interaction of landscape
features and sound propagation, and the importance of an
organism’s perception of scale in the landscape in which it
lives. The Tippecanoe study shows that temporal patterns
www.biosciencemag.org

Downloaded from http://bioscience.oxfordjournals.org/ at FMRP/USP/BIBLIOTECA CENTRAL on April 24, 2014

site possessed the greatest diversity of sounds, from flies
(200 Hz) to birds (8.7 kHz from one unidentified bird).
Finally, in the old-growth site (Crescent Meadow), animals
produced sounds from 200 Hz (flies) to around 9 kHz
(birds); about 82% of the spectrogram was occupied by
vocalizations. Frogs chorused between 600 Hz to 2 kHz,
just below the acoustic frequency of the robin, which sings
in the 2 to 3.3 kHz range. Sound files 35–38 contain sample
dawn chorus recordings from this study. The amount
of acoustic activity for each site (figure 9a) shows that
the Buckeye Flats site contained more than 10 times the
amount of acoustic activity, mostly from the geophonic
sounds of the stream. Within each site (figure 9b), acoustic
activity was highly variable over a season; fall, in half of the
cases, was the most acoustically active season (see sample
sound files 35–38).

Articles

of soundscapes exhibit strong dawn and dusk chorus
peaks that diminish with increasing human disturbance
on the landscape. The Sequoia study attempts to quantify
the effects of geophony on biophonic patterns, and shows
that animals that communicate in each habitat do so at
different frequencies to avoid overlap. Lastly, the Tuscany
soundscape mapping study illustrates that soundtopes
constructed from acoustic arrays could be used to quantify
the spatial dynamics of soundscapes.
The way forward
The study of soundscapes can yield valuable information
about the dynamics of a variety of landscapes. Given that
technological advances are occurring rapidly and theories
about the interplay of patterns and processes occurring
within landscapes are maturing, we believe that soundscape
ecology can enhance our understanding of how humans
affect ecosystems. Indeed, we are at a critical juncture in our
history, and there is a need for transformative approaches
that help us to more thoroughly elucidate how humans
affect our planet (Vitousek et al. 1997, Chapin et al. 2000).
At present, there is a renewed interest in studying ecosystems at large, continental scales. Automated acoustic
recordings could provide a means to collect information
www.biosciencemag.org 	

at fine temporal resolutions (Porter et al. 2005). Initiatives
such as the National Science Foundation’s NEON (National
Ecological Observatory Network) project are being built to
study ecosystems at subcontinental scales (Keller et al. 2008).
Furthermore, recordings made today will become tomorrow’s “acoustic fossils,” possibly preserving the only evidence
we have of ecosystems that may vanish in the future because
of a lack of desire or ability to protect them.
We also argue that society should value natural soundscapes as it does other aspects of nature. Soundscapes represent the heritage of our planet’s acoustic biodiversity,
and reflect Earth’s natural assemblage of organisms—
soundscapes are an ecosystem service (MA 2005) that
provides cultural and other services. Natural sounds
are our auditory link to nature, and the trends toward
increasing society’s “nature deficient disorder” (Louv
2008) are likely to continue as we replace natural sounds
with those made by humans. This research reflects again
on Rachel Carson’s call made in Silent Spring, in which she
highlighted the dangers of pesticides and their potential
threat to wildlife and the environment. The unintended
silencing of organisms by a myriad of human activities
provides yet another indication of our impact on the
planet’s ecosystems.
March 2011 / Vol. 61 No. 3 • BioScience 213

Downloaded from http://bioscience.oxfordjournals.org/ at FMRP/USP/BIBLIOTECA CENTRAL on April 24, 2014

Figure 8. Frequency band dominance summarized for four months of the Tippecanoe study.

Articles

Downloaded from http://bioscience.oxfordjournals.org/ at FMRP/USP/BIBLIOTECA CENTRAL on April 24, 2014

Figure 9. Summary of the Sequoia National Park study. Acoustic activity averages for each site and by season. Note that
the Buckeye Flats location (a) contains greater acoustic activity, a result of the nearby rapid flowing stream that produced
considerable geophonic sounds. The inset (b) graphs the same data but with Buckeye Flats removed. These values (b)
reflect mostly biophony. Sycamore Creek contained the greatest acoustic activity of these three. The fall contains the
greatest activity although there was no consistent pattern across sites. Photos of each landscape are provided in (c).
214 BioScience • March 2011 / Vol. 61 No. 3	

www.biosciencemag.org

Articles

Acknowledgments
This article emerged from two symposia held at the US
International Association of Landscape Ecology (IALE)
meetings, one in 2009 in Snowbird, Utah, and the second
in 2010 in Athens, Georgia. Funding for the Tippecanoe
Soundscape Study was obtained by a grant from the Lilly
Foundation for the establishment of a Center for the
Environment at Purdue. Development of acoustic metrics
for the Tippecanoe Rhythms of Nature Study was made
possible from a National Science Foundation III-XT grant to
BP. Funds to support LV, BN, and SD were provided by the
Department of Forestry and Natural Resources at Purdue
University, and travel funds for LV and BN to attend the US
IALE meetings in 2009 and 2008 respectively, were provided
by the NASA Michigan State University US IALE travel fund.
The authors greatly acknowledge the input on an earlier version of this manuscript by Barny Dunning, Lori Ivans, Kerry
Rabenold, Jeff Holland, Jeff Dukes, Jim Plourde, Stuart
Bolton, Kimberly Robinson, Camille Washington-Ottombre,
www.biosciencemag.org 	

Alex Pijanowski, Burak Pekin, and Christian Perry. Jarrod
Doucette assisted with the graphics.
References cited
Acevedo MA, Villanueva-Rivera LJ. 2006. Using automated digital recording
systems as effective tools for the monitoring of birds and amphibians.
Wildlife Society Bulletin 34: 211–214.
Ahola M, Laaksonen T, Sippola K, Eeva T, Rainio K, Lehikoinen E. 2004.
Variation in climate warming along the migration route uncouples
arrival and breeding dates. Global Change Biology 10: 1610–1617.
Barber JR, Crooks KR, Fristrup KM. 2010. The costs of chronic noise
exposure for terrestrial organisms. Trends in Ecology and Evolution
25: 180–189.
Beebee TJC. 2002. Amphibian breeding and climate. Nature 374: 219–220.
Bennet-Clark HC. 1998. Size and scale effects as constraints in insect sound
communication. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 353:
407–419.
Brown CH, Gomez R, Waser PM. 1995. Old world monkey vocalizations:
Adaptation to the local habitat? Animal Behaviour 50: 945–961.
Brown JL, Shou-Hsien L, Bhagabati N. 1999. Long-term trend toward
earlier breeding in an American bird: A response to global warming?
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 96: 5565–5569.

March 2011 / Vol. 61 No. 3 • BioScience 215

Downloaded from http://bioscience.oxfordjournals.org/ at FMRP/USP/BIBLIOTECA CENTRAL on April 24, 2014

Figure 10. Soundscape maps for the Tuscany bird acoustic study. Twenty recorders were placed in a 4 3 5 grid with
100-meter spacing and 180 minutes of recordings made. An acoustic complexity index (ACI) was calculated for each
point and then interpolation software used to create a surface similar to an ecotope; we call these “soundtopes.” See
supplementary material online (dx.doi.org/10.1525/bio.2011.61.3.6) for details on how to calculate ACI.

Articles

216 BioScience • March 2011 / Vol. 61 No. 3	

Miller NP. 2008. US national parks and management of park soundscapes:
A review. Applied Acoustics 69: 77–92.
Morton ES. 1975. Ecological sources of selection on avian sounds. American
Naturalist 109: 17–34.
National Parks Overflights Act. 1987. 16 USC 1-1a. U.S. Public Law 100-91.
[NPS] National Park Service. 2006. National Park Service Management
Policies. NPS.
Porter J, et al. 2005. Wireless sensor networks for ecology. BioScience 55:
561–572.
Rolston H. 1988. Environmental Ethics: Duties to and Values in the Natural
World. Temple University Press.
Ryan MJ, Brenowitz EA. 1985. The role of body size, phylogeny, and ambient
noise in the evolution of bird song. American Naturalist 126: 87–100.
Saunders AA. 1947. The seasons of bird song: The beginning of song in
spring. The Auk 64: 97–107.
Schafer RM. 1977. Tuning of the World. Knopf.
Slabbekoorn H, Peet M. 2003. Birds sing at higher pitch in urban noise.
Nature 424: 267.
Southworth M. 1969. The sonic environment of cities. Environment and
Behavior 1: 49–70.
Staicer CA, Spector DA, Horn AG. 1996. The dawn chorus and other diel
patterns in acoustic signaling. Pages 426–453 in Kroodsma DE, Miller
EH, eds. Ecology and Evolution of Acoustic Communication in Birds.
Cornell University Press.
Sueur J, Pavoine S, Hamerlynck O, Duvail S. 2008. Rapid acoustic survey for
biodiversity appraisal. PLoS ONE 3: e4065.
Trifa VM, Kirschel ANG, Taylor CE, Vallejo EE. 2008. Automated species
recognition of antbirds in a Mexican rainforest using hidden Markov
models. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 123: 2424–2431.
Truax B. 1999. Handbook of Acoustic Ecology. 2nd ed. (CD-ROM). Cambridge Street.
Turner MG. 1989. Landscape ecology: the effect of pattern on process.
Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 20: 171–197.
Turner MG, Gardner RH, O’Neill RV. 2001. Landscape Ecology in Theory
and Practice: Pattern and Process. Springer.
Urban DL, O’Neill RV, Shugart HH. 1987. Landscape ecology. BioScience
37: 119–127.
Vitousek PM, Mooney HA, Lubchenco J, Melillo JM. 1997. Human domination of Earth’s ecosystems. Science 277: 494–499.
Walker TJ. 1962. Factors responsible for intraspecific variation in the calling
songs of crickets. Evolution 16: 407–428.
Wiens JA, Milne BT. 1989. Scaling of ‘landscapes’ in landscape ecology, or, landscape ecology from a beetle’s perspective. Landscape Ecology 3: 87–96.
Williams KS, Simon C. 1995. The ecology, behavior and evolution of periodical cicadas. Annual Review of Entomology 40: 269–295.
Wilson EO. 1999. The Diversity of Life. W. W. Norton.
Wood WE, Yezerinac SM. 2006. Song sparrow (Melospiza melodia) song
varies with urban noise. The Auk 123: 650–659.
Wrightson K. 2000. An introduction to acoustic ecology. Soundscape: The
Journal of Acoustic Ecology 1: 10–13.

Bryan C. Pijanowski (bpijanow@purdue.edu), Luis J. Villanueva-Rivera, Sarah
L. Dumyahn, and Brian M. Napoletano are with the Human-Environment
Modeling and Analysis Laboratory, Department of Forestry and Natural
Resources, at Purdue University in West Lafayette, Indiana. Almo Farina and
Nadia Pieretti are with the Department of Mathematics, Physics and Informatics at Urbino University in Italy. Bernie L. Krause is with Wild Sanctuary
Inc., in Glen Ellen, California. Stuart H. Gage is with the Department of
Entomology at Michigan State University in East Lansing, Michigan.

www.biosciencemag.org

Downloaded from http://bioscience.oxfordjournals.org/ at FMRP/USP/BIBLIOTECA CENTRAL on April 24, 2014

Brumm H. 2004. The impact of environmental noise on song amplitude on
a territorial bird. Journal of Animal Ecology 73: 434–440.
Carson R. 1962. Silent Spring. Houghton Mifflin.
Chapin FS, et al. 2000. Consequences of changing biodiversity. Nature 405:
234–242.
Currie DJ. 1991. Energy and large-scale patterns of animal and plant species
richness. American Naturalist 137: 27–49.
Daniel JC, Blumstein DT. 1998. A test of the acoustic adaptation hypothesis
in four species of marmots. Animal Behavior 56: 1517–1528.
Dooling RJ, Brown SD, Klump GM, Okanoya K. 1992. Auditory perception of conspecific and heterospecific vocalizations in birds:
Evidence for special processes. Journal of Comparative Psychology
106: 20–28.
Farina A. 2006. Principles and Methods in Landscape Ecology.
Springer.
Farina A, Belgrano A. 2006. The eco-field hypothesis: Toward a cognitive
landscape. Landscape Ecology 21: 5–17.
Ficken RW, Ficken MS, Hailman JP. 1974. Temporal pattern shifts to avoid
acoustic interference in singing birds. Science 183: 762–763.
Fisher JA. 1998. What the hills are alive with: In defense of the sounds of
nature. Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 56: 167–179.
Fletcher N. 2007. Animal bioacoustics. Pages 785–804 in Rossing TD, ed.
Handbook of Acoustics. Springer.
Forman RTT, Godron M. 1981. Patches and structural components for a
landscape ecology. BioScience 31: 733–740.
Forrest TG. 1994. From sender to receiver: Propagation and environmental
effects on acoustic signals. American Zoologist 34: 644–654.
Fuller RA, Warren PH, Gaston KJ. 2007. Daytime noise predicts nocturnal
singing in urban robins. Biological Letters 3: 368–370.
Gerhardt HC. 1994. The evolution of vocalization in frogs and toads.
Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 25: 293–324.
Hartmann WM. 1997. Signals, Sound and Sensation. American Institute
of Physics.
Hickling R, Brown RL. 2000. Analysis of acoustic communication in ants.
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 108: 1920–1929.
Kacelnik A, Krebs JR. 1982. The dawn chorus in the great tit (Parus major):
Proximate and ultimate causes. Behaviour 83: 287–309.
Keller M, Schimel DS, Hargrove WW, Hoffman FM. 2008. A continental
strategy for the National Ecological Observatory Network. Frontiers in
Ecology and the Environment 6: 282–284.
Krause B. 1987. Bioacoustics, habitat ambience in ecological balance. Whole
Earth Review 57: 14–18.
Kroodsma D. 2005. The Singing Life of Birds: The Art and Science of Listening to Birdsong. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
Lambin EF, Giest HJ. 2006. Land-use and Land-cover Change: Local
Processes and Global Impacts. Springer.
Liu J, et al. 2007. Complexity of coupled human and natural systems. Science 317: 1513–1516.
Louv R. 2008. Last Child in the Woods: Saving our Children from Naturedeficit Disorder. Algonquin Books.
[MA] Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. 2005. Ecosystems and Human
Well-being: Synthesis. Island Press.
MacArthur RH, MacArthur JW. 1961. On bird species diversity. Ecology
42: 594–598.
Marten K, Quine D, Marler P. 1977. Sound-transmission and its significance
for animal vocalization, II: Tropical forest habitats. Behavioral Ecology
and Sociobiology 2: 291–302.
McComb K, Reby D. 2005. Vocal communication networks in large terrestrial mammals. Pages 372–389 in McGregor P, ed. Animal Communication Networks. Cambridge University Press.

