Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1213–1232
DOI 10.1007/s10980-011-9600-8

RESEARCH ARTICLE

What is soundscape ecology? An introduction and overview
of an emerging new science
Bryan C. Pijanowski • Almo Farina •
Stuart H. Gage • Sarah L. Dumyahn •
Bernie L. Krause

Received: 7 September 2010 / Accepted: 14 March 2011 / Published online: 1 May 2011
 Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2011

Abstract We summarize the foundational elements
of a new area of research we call soundscape ecology.
The study of sound in landscapes is based on an
understanding of how sound, from various sources—
biological, geophysical and anthropogenic—can be
used to understand coupled natural-human dynamics
across different spatial and temporal scales. Useful
terms, such as soundscapes, biophony, geophony and
anthrophony, are introduced and defined. The intellectual foundations of soundscape ecology are
described—those of spatial ecology, bioacoustics,
urban environmental acoustics and acoustic ecology.
We argue that soundscape ecology differs from the
humanities driven focus of acoustic ecology although
soundscape ecology will likely need its rich vocabulary and conservation ethic. An integrative
B. C. Pijanowski (&)  S. L. Dumyahn
Laboratory of Human-Environment Modelling and
Analysis, Department of Forestry and Natural Resources,
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47906, USA
e-mail: bpijanow@purdue.edu
A. Farina
Department of Basic Sciences and Fundamentals,
Urbino University, 61029 Urbino, Italy
S. H. Gage
Department of Entomology, Michigan State University,
East Lansing, MI 48824, USA
B. L. Krause
Wild Sanctuary Inc., P.O. Box 536, Glen Ellen,
CA 95442, USA

framework is presented that describes how climate,
land transformations, biodiversity patterns, timing of
life history events and human activities create the
dynamic soundscape. We also summarize what is
currently known about factors that control temporal
soundscape dynamics and variability across spatial
gradients. Several different phonic interactions (e.g.,
how anthrophony affects biophony) are also
described. Soundscape ecology tools that will be
needed are also discussed along with the several ways
in which soundscapes need to be managed. This
summary article helps frame the other more application-oriented papers that appear in this special issue.
Keywords Soundscape ecology  Landscape
ecology  Bioacoustics  Soundscape conservation 
Acoustic ecology  Biophony  Geophony 
Anthrophony  Land use change  Climate change

Introduction
Sounds that emanate from the landscape vary spatially
and temporally. Forests, grasslands and wetlands
support a diverse array of sounds produced by mammals, birds, amphibians, and insects (Marler and
Slabberkoorn 2004). The urban landscape is filled
with sounds generated by vehicles, sirens, machines
and other human-produced sounds (Botteldooren et al.

123

1214

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1213–1232

2004; Raimbault and Dubois 2005). Geophysical
motion of the atmosphere and water create natural
sounds, such as those of gushing rivers flowing over the
terrain, or rain falling through a canopy (Swanson et al.
1988). The integration of all of these sounds across the
landscape creates the ‘‘soundscape’’ (Pijanowski et al.
2011).
In this paper, we provide an introduction and
overview of a new field of science we call soundscape ecology—the focus of this special issue of
Landscape Ecology. First, we present useful terms
and describe the history of the term ‘‘soundscapes’’ as
it has been used by different disciplines. A review of
the intellectual roots of this new field is given. We
then present an integrative framework of the underlying causes of soundscape dynamics, with a focus on
the drivers of global and regional environmental
change (sensu Turner et al. 1990). We discuss the
tools that we believe will be necessary for soundscape
ecology to advance. Finally, we summarize several
important considerations that are necessary for the
conservation of soundscapes.

Soundscape ecology—a lexicon
Several disciplines have used the term ‘‘soundscape’’.
The etymology of the term ‘‘-scape’’ is reference to an
‘‘area, scene, space or view’’ (Zonneveld and Forman
1990). ‘‘Soundscape’’ is thus ‘‘sounds occurring over
an area’’. The first use of the term was by Southworth
(1969), an urban planner who used ‘‘soundscape’’ to
Table 1 Definitions of
soundscapes used in the
literature

refer to the acoustic properties of cities that help people
relate to certain spaces. Southworth tested how blind
people used sounds to form a ‘‘sonic identity’’ of
unique areas in Boston. Schafer (1977), in his seminal
book ‘‘Tuning of the World’’, formalized the term
‘‘soundscape’’(Coates 2005) as the ‘‘auditory properties of landscapes’’ (see also Truax 1999). A musician
by training, Schafer was concerned about noise
pollution and the lack of awareness humans have of
their acoustic surroundings. Urban acousticians (e.g.,
Raimbault and Dubois 2005; Dubois et al. 2006) have
used ‘‘soundscapes’’ as a neutral term, to avoid the
word noise, in describing the ‘‘structuring of categorical space of sounds in cities’’.
Our working definition of soundscapes is ‘‘the
collection of biological, geophysical and anthropogenic sounds that emanate from a landscape and which
vary over space and time reflecting important ecosystem processes and human activities’’ (Pijanowski et al.
2011; see Table 1 for a list of various definitions of the
term soundscape). We emphasize the diversity of
sound sources, those that are biological, which we call
biophony, after Krause (1987), anthrophony (human
produced sounds) and geophony (geophysically created sounds) that occur in a landscape (see also Kull
2006). Biophony is the collection of sounds produced
by all organisms at a location over a specified time.
Geophony are those sounds originating from the
geophysical environment, which includes wind, water,
thunder, movement of earth, etc. Anthrophony is
produced by stationary (e.g., air conditioning units)
and moving (e.g., vehicles) human-made objects. We

R. M. Schafer (1994): ‘‘the soundscape is any acoustic field of study… We can isolate an acoustic
environment as a field of study just as we can study the characteristics of a given landscape.
However, it is less easy to formulate an exact impression of a soundscape than of a landscape’’
(p. 7). The soundscape can be any defined acoustic environment
B. Krause (1987, 2002): all of the sounds (biophony, geophony and anthrophony) present in an
environment at a given time, soundscape as a finite resource- competing for spectral space (niche
hypothesis)
A. Farina (2006): the collection of sounds associated with a given landscape as perceived by
organisms (eco-field hypothesis)
National Park Service (2006): on natural soundscapes: ‘‘Park natural soundscape resources
encompass all the natural sounds that occur in parks, including the physical capacity for
transmitting those natural sounds and the interrelationships among park natural sounds of
different frequencies and volumes. Natural sounds occur within and beyond the range of sounds
that humans can perceive, and they can be transmitted through air, water, or solid materials’’ (p.
56)
(Pijanowski et al. 2011): complex arrangement of sounds from multiple sources including
biophony, geophony and anthrophony that creates acoustical patterns in space and time

123

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1213–1232

posit that sound reflects natural and human activities
and thus serves as an excellent ‘‘universal’’ variable to
consider in any study of a coupled natural-human
system (Liu et al. 2007).

Intellectual roots of soundscape ecology
Soundscape ecology shares many parallels with landscape ecology and biogeography (Fig. 1a). Landscape
ecology centers on the relationship between spatial
pattern and corresponding ecological processes (Forman and Godron 1981; Urban et al. 1987; Turner 1989;
Turner and Gardner 1991; Wiens 1992; Turner et al.
2001; Farina 2006). The interaction of pattern and
process is generally studied at multiple spatial scales
with outcomes directed toward natural resource management or decision making. Land use change (Turner
1987; Hobbs 1993; Dale et al. 1994; Pickett and
Cadenasso 1995), and more recently, climate change
(Wascher and Opdam 2004; Vos et al. 2008) are
frequently studied as major disturbances of the landscape. Soundscapes reflect many ecological processes
and are ecological patterns in themselves (Matsinos
et al. 2008). Comparison of soundscapes can also occur
across large spatial scales and thus soundscape ecology
could build from the knowledge generated in the field
of biogeography. Biogeographers (cf. Lomolino et al.

1215

2004) have long studied how species distributions and
diversity patterns vary across distinct biophysical
gradients, such as those found along altitudinal,
latitudinal and biogeochemical gradients. Biogeography also considers evolutionary factors that are
behavioural (Lomolino et al. 2004). Thus, we believe
that landscape ecology and biogeography are fields
which will help support integrative soundscape ecology research.
A more comprehensive study of soundscapes should
build from several other disciplines including urban
environmental acoustics, bioacoustics, and acoustic
ecology (Fig. 1). Urban environmental acoustics
(Fig. 1b) is the study of ‘‘the aggregate of sounds that
are interwoven with the built environment’’ and that
‘‘emerge naturally due to the typical activities that take
place in the public area’’ (Hartmann 1997; Botteldooren et al. 2004). Because the acoustic properties of
urban areas affect the quality of life of its residents,
urban soundscape research has often been extended to
include urban planning (Carles et al. 1999; Ouis 2001;
Raimbault and Dubois 2005; Adams et al. 2006;
Guastavino 2006; Raimbault 2006). Modelling of
sound propagation from noisy human-made objects
and the development of noise mitigation techniques
has been the focus of considerable research by
transportation experts who study urban sounds (e.g.,
Staples 1996; De Coensel et al. 2005; De Coensel and

Fig. 1 Intellectual foundations of soundscape ecology. Colors of the boxes are used for the online version to indicate which
discipline contributes to the integrative framework contained in Fig. 2

123

1216

Botteldooren 2006, 2007). Urban environmental
acoustic studies also include subjective assessments
of different urban sounds, determining how humans
perceive and value common urban sounds (e.g., Yang
and Kang 2005; Dubois et al. 2006; Lavandier 2006;
Jeon et al. 2010). Further research on the role of the
built-environment, the patterns of anthrophony, the
physics of sound propagation in the environment as
well as the role that sound plays in shaping human
perceptions of cities (Garrioch 2003), will be necessary
as we attempt to understand the role that humans have
on soundscape composition.
Bioacoustics (Fig. 1c) has a rich history (for excellent
summaries, see Kroodsma et al. 1982; Bradybury et al.
1998; Marler and Slabberkoorn 2004; or Fletcher 2007).
Its interdisciplinary focus integrates animal behaviour
(Marten and Marler 1977; Marten et al. 1977; Grafe
1996; Wollerman 1999; Kroodsma and Haver 2005;
Barber and Conner 1997), mechanisms of sound
production by animals (e.g., Walker 1962; Amstrong
1963; Walker 1975), evolutionary foundations (e.g.,
Morton 1975; Greenfield 1994; Mitani and Stuht 1998),
communication and habitat features (e.g., Ryan and
Brenowitz 1985; Boncoraglio and Saino 2007; Barker
2008), animal physiology and anatomy (e.g., Greenewalt 1968; Walker 1969; Webster et al. 1992), and timing
of vocalizations (Allen 1913; Saunders 1947, 1948;
Kacelink and Krebs 1982; Cuthill and MacDonald 1990;
Hutchinson 2002; Berg et al. 2006; Hardouin et al.
2008), among others. Limited research has been
conducted in freshwater systems (Wysocki et al. 2007;
Qi et al. 2008; Amoser and Ladich 2010). Considerable
research, however, has been conducted in ocean
systems, especially in the area of marine mammal
communication and human noise production (e.g.,
Payne and Webb 1971; Charif et al. 2001; Croll et al.
2001; Vasconcelos et al. 2007; Amoser and Ladich
2010). In general however, bioacoustics has focused
primarily on individual species.
Acoustic ecology (Fig. 1d) also brings to soundscape
ecology a rich vocabulary that can assist ecologists in
thinking about soundscapes. For example, Schafer
(1977), Truax (1978, 1987), and Guastavino (2007),
introduced useful terms and taxonomies to describe
various types of sounds and soundscapes. Schafer used
the terms ‘‘keynotes’’, ‘‘soundmarks’’ and ‘‘sound signals’’ to describe background sounds, location specific
sounds and foreground sounds, respectively, of landscapes. The keynote of a natural soundscape is often

123

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1213–1232

wind, whereas in cities it is dominated by traffic.
Soundmarks might be spring the chorusing of peepers in
Midwestern USA wetlands or the ringing of church bells
in small towns in Europe. Soundscapes that contain a
large degree of acoustic frequency diversity are referred
to as ‘‘hi-fi’’; these sounds can be heard clearly and are
not masked or crowded. In ‘‘lo-fi’’ soundscapes, one
frequency spectrum (often low frequencies such as in
urban environments) dominates and distant sounds
cannot be discerned. Wrightson (2000) describes hi-fi
soundscapes as those possessing ‘‘acoustic colorization’’, meaning that audible sounds bounce, are
absorbed, and echo off of the natural features of a
landscape so that acoustic size (i.e., sound intensity) and
distance from the sound emitter can be interpreted by the
listener. Finally, acoustic ecologists encouraged people
to take ‘‘soundwalks’’ and be ‘‘earwitnesses’’ in the hope
that people would increase the awareness of their
acoustic surroundings.
The field of acoustic ecology, as envisioned by
Schafer (1977) and Truax (1978), provides several
important humanities-based perspectives useful to
soundscape ecologists. The term ‘‘soundscape ecology’’
defined by Truax (1978) as the ‘‘study of the effects of
the acoustic environment on the physical responses or
behavior of those living in it.’’ (p. 127). It was used
interchangeably with the term ‘‘acoustic ecology’’
(p. 2). However, the field of study referred to by Truax
and Schafer is not ecological in a true sense but rather a
study of natural sounds and how people respond and
value these properties of the environment. A major
contribution that Schafer made was that he emphasized
the need to allow nature to create its natural sounds,
posing the question ‘‘is the soundscape of the world an
indeterminate composition over which we have no
control, or are we its composers and performers,
responsible for giving it form and beauty?’’. The label
of ‘‘acoustic ecology’’ seems appropriate too for the
humanities-focussed inquiry as a major synthesizing
activity of this group was the support of research and
initiatives organized under the auspices of the World
Forum for Acoustic Ecology (www.wfae.org).

Underlying processes of soundscape dynamics:
an integrative framework
Landscapes are dynamic systems perturbed by natural
and anthropogenic factors (Forman and Godron 1981;

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1213–1232

1217

Fig. 2 Conceptual framework describing the underlying processes of the soundscape. Labels and color coding are used for the online
version to tie the information presented in Fig. 1

Urban et al. 1987; Turner 1989). A variety of these
dynamics relate to sound production. An integrative
framework of soundscapes is presented in Fig. 2 that
describes how natural and human driven factors
influence underlying ecological and social acoustic
patterns. We should emphasize that this integrative
framework is not exhaustive; our purpose here is to
demonstrate how a variety of global environmental
change factors influence sound dynamics in
landscapes.
Within the human system (component A), human
needs, values, policies and behaviors lead to land
transformations (label #1) in the form of land use
patterns (label #2). The built environment (component
B) is composed of artificial structures and surfaces
(label #3) used for shelter and for transportation which
shape human activity patterns (label #4). These human
activities give rise to the spatial and temporal patterns
of human generated sound or anthrophony (label #5).
The built environment alters natural habitat structure
(label #6) which is considered the greatest threat to
biodiversity over the next century (Chapin et al. 2000).
The atmosphere (component C) is highly dynamic,
creating rain and air movement patterns (label #7) that,
upon interactions with the geophysical features (label
#8) of the natural environment (component D), give

rise to sounds derived by water and wind (label #9).
Climate patterns influence plant community structure
(Gaston 2000; Parmesan 2006) which in turn influences diversity patterns of animals (label #10).
Changing climate could also alter geophony patterns;
even the increase in frequency of extreme events (e.g.,
thunder, high precipitation periods) could interfere
with animal communication. Biophony (label #11)
created from these biodiversity patterns (label #10) and
the timing of life history events (label #10) interact
with sound inputs from the geophysical (label #9) and
built environment (label #5) interface to create the
soundscape.
A soundscape (component E) possesses four (label
#12) measureable properties which are explored further in ‘‘Soundscape dynamics’’ section: acoustic
composition, temporal patterns, spatial variability,
and acoustic interactions. Composition is the acoustic
frequency (subjectively what humans perceive as
pitch) and amplitude (sound level) of all sounds
occurring at the same time and location (‘‘Acoustic
frequency patterns’’ section). Temporal patterns are
numerous and reflect certain biological events (e.g.,
breeding) that occur in the landscape (‘‘Temporal
patterns in soundscapes: rhythms of nature’’ section).
Spatial variability results from the heterogeneity of the

123

1218

biophysical landscape (‘‘Spatial dimensions of soundscapes’’ section). Finally, a large array of natural and
human-induced interactions occurs between biophony,
geophony, and anthrophony to create the integrated
soundscape (‘‘Phonic interactions’’ section).
Soundscape dynamics feedback to natural and
human systems (Fig. 2). For example, the interactions
between species and their competition for acoustic
space (Greenfield 1994) influences mate selection and
predator prey interactions (Barber et al. 2010), and thus
have the potential to affect population and community
dynamics (label #13). Soundscapes affect a variety of
human social components (label #14) including human
health (e.g., Stansfeld and Matheson 2003), natural
resource management of common spaces (Dumyahn
and Pijanowski, in review b) and their sense of place
(Dumyahn and Pijanowski, in review a).

Recording and measuring a soundscape
Krause (2002) summarized in detail many different
ways to record natural soundscapes. The paper by
Villanueva-River et al. (in review) serves as an
introduction to sound for ecologists and details about
the physical properties of sound, the ways that sound
is recorded, stored and analysed can be found there.
There are a variety of tools and techniques for
processing and analyzing digital sound files. One
familiar visual acoustic tool used by ornithologists is
the spectrogram (Stephens and Bate 1966). Spectrograms display acoustic frequencies along the y-axis,
Fig. 3 Spectrograms for
15-min recordings from a
wetland in central Indiana.
Recordings were made on
April 8, 2008 and acoustic
sensor set to start at the top
of every hour. Readers can
listen to these recordings
and view interactive
spectrograms at
http://www.purdue.edu/
soundscapes/
landscape_ecology

123

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1213–1232

time on the x-axis and colors are used to denote
intensity. A series of recordings in a central Indiana
wetland illustrate the usefulness of the spectrogram
(Fig. 3). Note that at 6 am, spring peepers chorus
constantly with Canada geese calling occasionally. At
7 am, songbirds begin their dawn chorus, spring
peepers chorus but not as intensely and a plane flies
over the wetland about 10 min into the 15-min
recording. At 8 am, distant road noise is present and
songbirds sing less intensely. A mid-afternoon rain
shower creates several geophonic sounds.
There are a variety of ways to analyze a spectrogram (see Chap. 3 in Bradybury et al. 1998 for an
excellent introduction to spectrogram analysis). Pijanowski et al. (2011) parsed acoustic frequencies into
bands, and then measured the amount of sound
occurring above an intensity threshold. Using 10
acoustic frequency bands, measures of acoustic
diversity, evenness and dominance were calculated
and plotted over time for seven locations differing in
land use. They found that (1) dawn and dusk chorus
were prominent in natural landscapes exhibiting the
diversity of acoustic signals; (2) seasonal patterns
were evident where high frequencies are most
dominant frequencies in late summer; and (3) acoustic frequency evenness is lowest in human dominated
landscapes. In addition, researchers could measure
the total acoustic frequency breadth and average
intensity. Villanueva-Rivera et al. (in review) were
able to discretize a spectrogram into small parts and
then input these data into a GIS and calculate sound
patch statistics (size, shape). They found that forested

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1213–1232

landscapes contain the greatest diversity of sound
signals, followed by urban landscapes.

Soundscape dynamics
To address questions in soundscape ecology
(Table 2), we must measure soundscapes in a variety
of ways: acoustically, temporally and spatially. We
describe approaches to each in this section.
Acoustic frequency patterns
Organisms produce a broad spectrum of sounds, and
their composition has several suspected ecological
causes. Krause (1987) proposed the Acoustic Niche
Hypothesis (ANH) which predicts that competitive
exclusion will cause species to adjust their signals to
minimize interference from sounds produced by
other species. Similar arguments have been made
by other bioacousticians. For example, Endler (1992,
1993) and Greenfield (1994) emphasized reproductive importance in acoustic signalling and argued that
sounds should evolve to maximize effectiveness of
intraspecific communication; therefore the timing,
frequency and spatial location of sound production
should be adapted to reduce acoustic interference
from other species. Acoustic partitioning has been
demonstrated in crickets (Walker 1974; Otte 1992;
Sueur 2002), birds (Ficken et al. 1974; Seddon and
Tobias 2007), and anurans (Grafe 1996; Feng and
Schul 2006).
Considerable research has also focussed on the
acoustic adaptation hypothesis, which predicts that
species should evolve the structure of their calls or
songs so that it maximizes transmission fidelity
(Forrest 1994). Several researchers (e.g., Morton
1975; Richards and Wiley 1980; Brown et al. 1995)
have found that bird songs differ according to the
habitat where the signaller lives. However, one large
comparative study of 121 species of Australian birds
(e.g., Blumestein and Turner 2005) showed only
modest support for the acoustic adaptation hypothesis; the researchers suggest that factors such as visual
cues, are important to communication in birds and
decrease selective pressure on acoustic modification
to optimize transmission. A second large comparative
study by Boncoraglio and Saino (2007) found weak
associations of maximum, minimum, peak frequency

1219

and frequency range with habitat type for 26 studies
on bird song and habitat structure.
There are several important implications to acoustic
niche hypothesis and acoustic adaptation hypothesis
which influence our interpretation of sound in landscapes. First, the soundscape of a habitat that has been
present long enough to provide its native species
sufficient time to optimize their vocalizations, should
exhibit much more spectral-temporal complexity and
signal diversity than a habitat that has been recently
disturbed or altered by human activity (Gage et al.
2001; Krause 2002). Second, the acoustic niche
hypothesis also implies that species removed from an
‘‘acoustically optimized’’ habitat should leave readily
detectable acoustic gaps which could serve as a
‘‘warning system’’ that the ecosystem is being altered
in a significant way (sensu Sueur et al. 2008a, b; see
also Riede 1993). Finally, acoustic adaptation hypothesis predicts that not all frequencies and sound
structures (e.g., modulation patterns) should be present
in all habitats.
Temporal patterns in soundscapes: rhythms
of nature
There are many recognized temporal cycles of
communication in animals; the most well studied
are those of birds, amphibians and insects. These
temporal patterns will reflect the timing of life
histories of animals that live in these habitats. Birds
are known to start singing each spring (Saunders
1947) in the mid to high latitudes. Birds also have
their most intense singing sessions early in the
morning and at dusk (Saunders 1948; Leopold and
Eynon 1961; Brown and Handford 2000). Several
hypotheses have been proposed (see Kacelink and
Krebs 1982 for review) that attempt to describe the
underlying mechanisms of the dawn chorus in birds;
the dusk chorus is likely under different controls
(Hardouin et al. 2008). In mid-latitude locations in
the spring, biophony may be composed of birds from
local breeding populations and as migrants, so
biophony might be greatest in the spring. There are
also many birds that call at night, such as whippoorwills and owls, thus monitoring of biophony patterns
during an entire day may help assess impacts of
environmental change on nocturnal animals as well.
The most common acoustic insects are crickets,
katydids, grasshoppers and cicadas. For example,

123

1220

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1213–1232

Table 2 Sample research questions for soundscape ecology organized into the four categories discussed in ‘‘Soundscape dynamics’’
section
Dimension

Natural dynamics

Human impacts

Frequency
patterns (6.1)

How common is acoustic niche partitioning? Is acoustic How does habitat alteration by humans impact acoustic
niche separation more important in the tropics where partitioning? As climate will re-order species at the
species richness is greatest? How can we measure
local scale, how will that affect acoustic niches? Are
acoustic niches?
empty acoustic niches a sign of disturbance?

Temporal patterns What are characteristic of dawn and dusk choruses?
(6.2)
How do these vary across different habitats? With
latitude? Over a season? What are the natural
seasonal patterns of biophony?

How do human activities affect dawn and dusk
choruses via habitat alteration and/or introduction of
anthrophony? How does climate change alter the
timing and composition of the dawn and dusk chorus?
How does climate change alter timing of biophony
patterns?

Vegetation/land
use gradient
(6.3)

How does biophony and geophony vary with the
complexity of vegetation structure? Is biophony
greatest in areas with the tallest canopies? Does
vegetation strata correlate with biophony?

How does biophony, geophony and anthrophony vary
across a gradient of human disturbance like land use?
In what ways does anthrophony alter biophony in
urban, agricultural and other human dominated
systems? What is the effect of topographic features on
the distribution of anthrophony? How can land use
planning be improved to increase biophony and
decrease anthrophony?

Altitudinal
gradients (6.3)

How does biophony and geophony vary across the
Given that species altitudinal ranges are smaller in
altitudinal gradient? Is there any evidence for shifts in tropical mountain areas, how do human sounds (e.g.,
the composition of soundscapes with isoclines that
roads) along altitudinal gradients affect animal
occur along elevational gradients? Are soundscape
communication?
patterns the same in tropical mountains versus
mountains in mid- and high-latitudes?

Core–edge habitat How does biophony vary across edges? How does
gradients (6.3)
biophony vary across sharp versus soft edges? How
far into the core does wind-generated geophony
decrease? How does biophony vary over time at an
edge compared to the core?

How does the composition of biophony, geophony and
anthrophony differ in interior habitats versus those
along edges? How does the composition of the
soundscape vary from center to edge of a patch? How
does habitat fragmentation affect soundscapes across
the landscape?

Flow gradients
(6.3)

How variable are river acoustic fluxes? How does river How might changes in land use in a river basin affect
morphology (channel structure) impact geophonies?
stream flow, geophony and then biophony? How
How do animals adjust their sound production along might climate change impact river geophonies in
rivers during low flow, moderate flow and peak flow ways that negatively impact animal communication?
periods?

Latitudinal
gradients (6.3)

How does the dawn and dusk chorus vary with latitude? Are there certain latitudes that are most sensitive to
What are the consistent elements of the dawn and
human generated noise? Are there times of the year
dusk chorus across all latitudes? Do certain
where, at a given latitude, that anthrophony needs to
taxonomic groups (e.g., insects) become more
be controlled?
prominent as one moves northward? How does the
dawn and dusk chorus intensity vary with latitude? In
very high latitudes, how does the dawn and dusk
chorus ‘‘play out’’ during the summer solstice?

Soundscapes as
information
resources (6.4)

How do animals use biophony and geophony to
How does noise impact the ability of animals to find
navigate through a landscape? What types of sounds food, shelter, etc.? Are landscapes where animals use
are used to identify spatial distribution of resources? sound exclusively to navigate through the landscape
How do organisms use sound with visual cues to
being damaged by anthrophony?
locate these resources?

stridulations from crickets are composed of pulses
and chirps, which are produced at very short intervals. Crickets are well known for having chirp rates

123

that are strongly influenced by temperature (Walker
1962). Many insects call during the day (cicadas), at
night (crickets), or both (some cicadas) and so exhibit

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1213–1232

diurnal patterns. Cycles can be seasonal; the timing of
species occurrence during the year relates to the life
cycle of an insect (e.g., Williams and Simon 1995).
Anurans can be very dominant participants in
many soundscapes as well. Vocalizations in frogs and
toads are performed by males who are attracting
females (Gerhardt 1994). The calling schedules of
many anurans are well known (De Sollar et al. 2006).
In the Midwestern USA, some species start mating
calls as early as February of each year while other
species do not start until late summer.
The life history of organisms that produce sound
throughout the year exhibit several distinct temporal
patterns and these have been referred to as ‘‘rhythms of
nature’’ (Pijanowski et al. 2011). Diurnal patterns
(Fig. 4a), such as the ‘‘dawn chorus’’ (Gwinner and
Brandstätter 2001), which is characteristic of the
increased intensity of bird songs in the morning, and
the ‘‘dusk chorus’’ where anurans, insects and other
nocturnal organisms sing, are common. Seasonal

1221

patterns (Fig. 4b) are likely to occur as well (Truax
1978), reflected in life history patterns such as breeding
and territoriality in many vertebrates (Gwinner and
Brandstätter 2001). We also extend the conceptual
model to include long-term dynamics across several
years. As local climate patterns alter temperature,
shifts in the timing of these life history events may
occur and several responses are possible. Parmesan
(2006) reviewed numerous reports of phenological
shifts that have occurred over the last several decades
as a result of global warming, and concluded that many
organisms, especially amphibians, were highly
impacted by increased temperature. Gibbs and Briesh
(2001) reported a two week advance on calling
phenology from the 1–2.3C increase in temperature
during the chorusing months. Advances in breeding of
birds have also been reported (Brown et al. 1999;
Collins and Storfer 2003). Thus, climate change can
alter soundscapes positively (increasing), or negatively
(decreasing).
Spatial dimensions of soundscapes
We anticipate that biophony, geophony, and anthrophony will vary spatially and will co-vary predictably
with certain ecological and human disturbance gradients. Some researchers suggest that there are only a
few broad-scale factors that influence biodiversity
patterns globally (Gaston 2000; Wiens and Donoghue
2004). We review several that are common to
ecological studies, including human land use/habitat
structure, altitudinal, flow, edge-to-core patch, and
latitudinal gradients. We briefly examine the ecological and acoustic literature that support biodiversity
and life history patterns that would give rise to certain
soundscape patterns and provide simple conceptual
models for how these might vary over the gradient.
Human disturbance gradients

Fig. 4 Conceptual models of how biophony varies over
different temporal scales (stylized after Truax 1978)

Land use change is a significant stressor on ecosystems (Lambin and Giest 2006), especially as these
changes alter biodiversity (Chapin et al. 2000). Land
transformations are significant. Globally, over 40% of
the land surface is now used for agriculture or urban
(Foley et al. 2005). There is considerable evidence to
suggest that vegetation structure influences species
richness which we expect will also be manifested in
its influence on biophony. MacArthur and MacArthur

123

1222

(1961) and MacArthur (1964) posited that faunal
diversity increases with increasing vertical stratification of vegetation in an area, the simplest being
canopy height, and demonstrated that the vegetation
structure in the vertical dimension correlated well
with avian diversity in several areas of the world.
Many studies on birds corroborate MacArthur’s
observation (e.g., Karr and Roth 1971; Rotenberry
and Wiens 1980; James and Wamer 1982; Blake and
Blake 1992). Siemann et al. (1998) conducted an
experimental study and found that insect species
diversity increased with increasing diversity of plant
species. Across different land uses, vegetation structure is more complex in temperate and tropical
forests, followed next by wetlands and then urban
areas (Fig. 5) and thus biophony is likely to decrease
with increasing human use of the landscape.
Anthrophony is likely to vary across land uses
(Fig. 5). In human dominated environments, such as
urban areas, anthropogenic sounds will dominate the
soundscape (Matsinos et al. 2008). We also assume
that as human activities increase so will anthrophony.
Overall, anthrophony in urban environments will be
composed of sound from vehicles (motors and road
noise), another machines associated with structures
(e.g., air conditioners). Areas with many land uses
(e.g., forests, agriculture) are likely to contain a
mixture of sound sources.
Geophony is also likely to vary across different land
use classes (Fig. 5). For example, wind rustling through
vegetation will be different in forests compared to that in
wetlands or farmland with crops or pasture. Rain sounds

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1213–1232

Fig. 6 Altitudinal gradients with patterns of biophony and
geophony

different in areas that have a canopy (i.e., forests)
compared to areas lacking vegetation, such as urban
areas where rain sound is amplified by hitting concrete
and other human made structures.
Altitudinal
Biogeographers (cf. Lomolino et al. 2004) have studied
biodiversity patterns along elevational gradients for
decades in order to determine how biophysical gradients influence biodiversity patterns. We anticipate that
the composition of the soundscape would vary naturally across altitudinal gradients, similar to those
observed of biodiversity patterns (Fig. 6). Most studies
have shown that species richness is greatest at midaltitudes (for a review, see Lomolino 2001; Brown
2001; although see Terborgh 1977); however, species
richness in the lowlands could also be high as streams
provide ample habitat and food for animals (Heaney
2001). Atmospheric scientists have identified patterns
of wind (and in some cases precipitation, GarciaMartino et al. 1996) that occur along altitudinal
gradients as well showing that wind increases with
increasing elevation. Indeed, studying biophony and
anthrophony patterns along mountain sides could help
elucidate important ecosystem factors impacted by
climate change.
Flow gradients

Fig. 5 Conceptual model of variations in soundscape elements
across a human disturbance intensity gradient. Dashed line
represents one possible pattern that could exist

123

Rivers are dynamic systems that channel water across
landscapes. When rivers contain considerable

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1213–1232

volumes of water, after a heavy rain event, the sounds
from these rivers can be substantial (Amoser and
Ladich 2010). Ficken et al. (1974) report that whistles
are more common among birds that sing along
streams; whistles can penetrate noise created by
rivers more effectively than buzzes or trills. At low
flow, sounds from the river may not mask sound
production by animals; however, as flows increase,
the level of ambient noise from the rivers also
increases eventually masking any biophony that is
produced by animals. As local and regional climates
change however, the soundscape flow gradients could
change as well, thus potentially having a negative
effect on fragile life history behaviors like mate
attraction and breeding performance of certain
species.
Habitat interior-edge gradients
Leopold (1933), McIntyre (1995), and other ecologists, have long studied how animal species are
distributed across gradients related to the distance
from the edge of a natural habitat. Ries et al. (2004)
reviewed the abundant literature on edge ecology
and found that some animals are attracted to forest
edges, leading to greater abundance of some species
such as birds and mammals, and greater species
richness of birds, mammals and plants in some
cases. On the other hand, some studies (e.g., on
reptiles and amphibians) reported a decrease in
abundance of individuals of a species or decreased
species richness (a negative effect). Thus, the edge
of a natural habitat is likely to be composed of
different vocalizing animals, possibly harbouring
more vocal species. The biophony along edges is
likely to be different than that at the core of the
habitat. Lovejoy et al. (1986), Miller et al. (1991),
Laurance (2004), Laurance et al. (2007) and others
have studied forest-climate interactions along forest
edges and have found that edges contain increased
wind speed, turbulence and vorticity compared to
forest interiors and that undisturbed forest interiors
have little wind. Therefore, geophony along an edge
should differ from the core. As land use change
continues to fragment the landscape and create more
edges, and climate change alters surface wind
patterns, the impacts of geophony along edges of
habitats and in turn, on biophony, could be
considerable.

1223

Latitudinal gradients
Variation of species richness and species distribution
patterns at a global scale has been observed since von
Humboldt. Latitude, through annual temperature and
radiation budgets, is likely to control both biodiversity
and life history schedules which will in turn influence
soundscape patterns as one moves from the poles to the
higher latitudes (Hillebrand 2004). The number of frost
free days and diel radiation patterns differ substantially
from the equator to the poles Thus the timing of the
dawn and dusk chorus along with the timing of all life
history events (e.g., breeding) varies as one moves
from the equator toward the poles..
The high amount of biodiversity at the equator is
likely to contribute toward greater soundscape diversity there than compared to higher latitudes (cf.
Gaston 2000; Rickelfs 2004). This suggests that
acoustic niche partitioning should be greatest at the
equator. Also, more species should occupy higher
acoustic frequencies in the tropics than in the higher
latitudes; higher acoustic frequencies are likely to be
occupied last because these frequencies require more
energy to produce in species (most vertebrates) that
use a vocalization organ to produce sounds; these
sounds also travel shorter distances than lower
frequency sounds.
As the planet continues to warm, one may surmise
that the dynamics of soundscapes may also change
across this latitudinal gradient. Birds breeding earlier
(Both and Visser 2001; Ahola et al. 2004; Parmesan
2006) and amphibians chorusing earlier (Blaustein
et al. 2001; Gibbs and Breisch 2001; Beebee 2002;
Parmesan 2007) have been documented by examining
historical records of the timing of life history events.
Thus soundscapes may be altered by climate change
through changes in circadian rhythms.
Phonic interactions
There are many possible interactions between biophony, geophony and anthrophony, which we broadly
call phonic interactions (Fig. 7). Adjustments can be
made by most organisms, either through the modifications of amplitude (Brumm 2004), frequency and/
or timing by the signaller. Many aspects of geophony
are known to affect biophony (label #1). Frogs, birds
and insects often stop producing sound when it is
windy or raining heavily (Feng and Schul 2006). The

123

1224

Fig. 7 Interactions between anthrophony, biophony and geophony and how they ultimately impact the biological and
human system. See text for complete description of the types of
interactions

frequencies of many animal vocalizations, are
adapted to be above the background frequencies of
low to moderate levels of wind (Greenfield 1994).
The timing of chorusing has also been argued to be
during times of the day (e.g., dawn and dusk) when
wind speeds are the lowest (although see Cuthill and
Macdonald 1990; Hutchinson 2002; Berg et al. 2006;
Hardouin et al. 2008). All of these responses are
active, in that the timing, acoustic frequency and
amplitude of calls and vocalizations are adjusted by
the signallers (i.e., animals) to increase the propagation of biophonic sounds in the environment.
How human produced sounds affect biophony (label
# 2) has recently been well studied (see Warren et al.
2006 for an excellent summary). Some birds adjust the
timing of their calls and sing more often at night in
urban environments (Katti and Warren 2003; Fuller
et al. 2007). Slabbekoorn and Peet (2003), Wood and
Yezerinac (2006), Parris and Schneider (2009), among
others, have shown that some birds sing at higher
frequencies in urban environments. Persi and Pescador
(2004) studied population levels of several species of
birds in high traffic and low-traffic noise conditions and
concluded that 15% of the species were affected by
traffic noise. Patricelli and Blickley (2006) and Slabbekoorn and Ripmeester (2008) argue that the
increased levels of noise in urban environments selects
for songbirds that have more behavioural plasticity,
demonstrated by the ability to adjust their calls; thus
human-created noise may create micro-evolutionary
selection pressures on urban avian communities. Noise
from traffic and airplanes has been demonstrated to
alter predator–prey relationships where sound is used

123

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1213–1232

by the predator to cue into prey (Barber et al. 2010).
Anthrophony has been shown to impact other vertebrates as well. Wollerman (1999) showed that moderate levels of background noise disrupted frogs from
finding mates. Anthrophony frequently masks geophony in a landscape (label #3). Many sounds produced by
humans are below 1 kHz, the same frequency that low
level wind and rain sounds occur. The amount of
energy in human-produced sounds is often great and
could mask geophonic sounds such as heavy downpours. Anthrophony is more common during the
daylight hours, and thus interference of the soundscape
is less likely at night.
Geophony and biophony impact anthrophony
(labels #4 and #5) in several indirect ways. Schafer
(1977) argued that humanities (especially performing
arts) have historically acquired its motivation from
the sounds of nature. In this way, some sounds that
humans make (a type of anthrophony) are a result of
humans listening and interpreting these sounds and
incorporating them into music (labelled a).
Interspecies biophonic interactions (label #6) can be
positive, with endemic species adapting to different
acoustic niches, or negative, as invasive species move
in and potentially masks the calls of an endemic animal
(Pijanowski et al. 2011). Given that the effector
invasive species is one of several important global
environmental change processes occurring, the potential for new species to produce sounds that disrupt
existing endemic acoustic niches is evident. We
consider this interaction as biophonic invasions and
people can obviously have a direct role in this by
transporting organisms from their endemic location to
a new location.
Finally, biophony also feeds back (labelled b) on
the rest of the biological system (Fig. 7) as vocalizations/stridulations etc. influence important life history
events like mate attraction, territoriality and predator–prey interactions. A rich and diverse biophony
likely reflects a healthy ecosystem.
Soundscapes as information resources for animals
Ecologists know that animals navigate through landscapes using a variety of senses: visual, acoustic and
olfactory (Isard and Gage 2001). Indeed, many landscape ecologists have argued that researchers need to
consider ‘‘organismal perspectives’’ (Wiens and Milne
1989) to fully understand the relationship between

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1213–1232

organisms and their environment. We believe that the
soundscape should be considered as an information
medium that allows for many organisms to transform
signals from their surroundings into useful information
to locate resources. Acoustic signals across a landscape
can act as a template by which organisms navigate
through a landscape certain signals serve as ‘‘signs’’
(Farina and Napoletano 2010) containing specific
information or ‘‘meaning’’ and feedback on important
biological functions (cf. Rothschild 1962). Burt and
Vehrencamp (2005) suggest that some individuals can
‘‘eavesdrop’’, listening to others vocalize about their
surroundings and thus learn about where resources
might be located. Likewise, organisms can listen for
certain geophonic patterns that could be used to locate
food, or specific resources that relate to that habitat.
When an individual has a need (e.g., hunger), immediately a specific function (e.g., searching for food) is
activated. This function is linked to a cognitive
template (e.g., social calling of foraging by a bird
flock). The cognitive template is overlapped to the
acoustic spatial configuration perceived in that
moment. Such a configuration, also called an eco-field
(Farina and Belgrano 2006), is a signal that when
coupled to the specific cognitive template, is transformed into a biosemiotic sign of food location. In this
example, mapping a conspecific calling of a flock
means an area where there are good possibilities to find
food. Acoustic signs are probably especially important
in densely vegetated environment, like forests and
shrub lands, where visual cues cannot be used
efficiently.

Soundscape ecology tools
Landscape ecology has flourished as a discipline
because spatial analysis tools, such as geographic
information systems (GIS), remote sensing software,
and spatial metric software have matured and become
relatively user friendly (Turner et al. 2001). Bioacoustics software has also become very powerful in
recent years with several no-cost versions of sound
processing software readily available for multiple
computer platforms. Although soundscape ecology
will benefit from the use of existing tools within
related ecological disciplines, new tools will be
needed that enable researchers to analyze acoustic
data from soundscapes (Butler et al. 2006).

1225

Challenges to ecological analysis of soundscapes
High resolution sound files are large. For example,
one 30 s monaural acoustic signal recorded at 16 bits
at 22 kHz is 2.5 MB. Sampling at  h intervals
yields 120 MB/day and if there are 10 replicates per
habitat the data size is 1.2 GB/day or 36 GB/month.
Studies that examine temporal patterns of soundscapes will generate many files and increase the need
for sophisticated management tools that can query,
extract, process, and integrate (e.g., with meteorological data) large numbers of sound files. Several
current soundscape studies have generated hundreds
of thousands of files, making their management a
challenge.
Placing several acoustic sensors across the landscape presents several other challenges. If researchers
are interested in the effects of short-term sound
events (e.g., clap of thunder on the chorusing patterns
of amphibians), synchronizing all sensors would
require specialized features to be built into the
sensors (Porter et al. 2005; Collins et al. 2006). As
the number of acoustic sensors increases in a study,
visiting each recorder to swap out data storage cards
and batteries can become impractical. Therefore,
wireless sensor networks powered by some form of
renewable energy may be needed.
Finally, the cost of microphones and data logging
equipment has been prohibitive, thus preventing the
collection of recordings for long-term studies on
soundscapes. This is rapidly changing as low cost,
field-ready microphones and data loggers are now
available. Indeed, many of these technical challenges
(e.g., need for large data storage) are likely to
diminish in the near future as the costs of these
technologies (e.g., cost of Terabytes of storage)
continue to decrease.
Current bioacoustic analysis tools
Several tools have been developed to assist soundscape ecologists to analyze the soundscape and to
facilitate the identification of species in the soundscape. For example, Raven, a software program for
the acquisition, visualization, measurement, and
analysis of sounds developed by the Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology, is available for use on a variety
of computer platforms. Another is SEEWAVE (Sueur
et al. 2008a, b), a software tool based on R which

123

1226

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1213–1232

performs several dozen analyses of sound files. Wave
surfer is a freeware software package that contains a
variety of powerful plug-ins, its use is demonstrated
in the Farina et al. paper in this issue.
Advances have also been made in the development
of automatic identification of animal sounds.
Researchers have successfully employed advanced
machine learning and non-linear statistical tools to
classify different vocalization or stridulating patterns
of insects, birds and mammals (McIlraith and Card
1997; Härmä 2003; Chesmore 2004; Trifa et al. 2008;
Baker and Logue 2003; Kasten et al. 2010). One
software package that uses these approaches, Song
Scope, developed by Wildlife Acoustics Inc., uses
built-in statistical classifiers that automatically scan
field recordings for patterns matching known training
recordings.
Despite the power and ease of use of many
bioacoustics current software packages, most are not
entirely ‘‘soundscape-ready’’. Because soundscape
ecologists will need to analyze a large number of
files (e.g., see Pijanowski et al. 2011 who analyzed
over 35,000 files) across landscapes and spanning
long periods of time, processing of potentially
millions of recordings will require advance scripting
capabilities, with interfaces to sophisticated pattern
matching and database software.

Soundscape information systems

Mapping soundscapes

Soundscape conservation

Advances are needed that can adequately represent a
soundscape in a map. Because the soundscape
contains many elements, such as loudness, spectral
features, qualitative aspects such as human perceptions of sound, using mapping technologies like
Geographic Information Systems (GIS) could help to
understand the interaction of sound patterns, the
biophysical environment and humans. Work in this
area is only now emerging (e.g., Klaeboe et al. 2006;
Papdimitriou et al. 2009; Pijanowski et al. 2011).
Integrating information from other sensors (e.g.,
wildlife movement, rainfall patterns, temperature
profiles, and traffic patterns) is likely to require
mapping technologies found in a GIS and lead to
advances in understanding spatial–temporal dynamics of the soundscape.

Soundscape ecology undertakes a comprehensive
research approach linking human and environmental
interactions and outcomes (Fig. 1). In this respect, it
is well suited for understanding threats to soundscapes and the benefits that ‘‘hi-fi’’ natural and unique
soundscapes provide. Previous efforts have focused
on the negative approach of noise regulation, but
researchers have noted that noise regulations are
neither effectively mitigating noise nor limiting the
spread of anthrophony (Berglund and Lindvall 1995;
Blomberg et al. 2003; Adams et al. 2006). Thus, a
new approach is needed that identifies high quality
soundscapes as a resource with both benefits and
associated values. Once these benefits and values are
understood new, more effective, soundscape conservation strategies can be defined and implemented.

123

Geographic information systems software has been
the hallmark tool of landscape ecologists. GIS helps
to manage, integrate, and process spatial data.
Soundscape ecologists require a similar set of tools
integrated into a Soundscape Information Systems
(SIS) (Gage et al. 2004). The SIS needs to feature an
end-to-end design, from input of large sets of acoustic
recordings through analysis of the recordings including generation of acoustic metrics and pattern
searching algorithms (Kasten et al. 2010). Ideally, a
web-based Soundscape Information System is needed
to enable a soundscape ecologist to input, archive,
retrieve, visualize, listen to, analyze, manage and
access raw and processed information based on large
collections of audio recordings from automated
sensors (Fig. 8). Early Soundscape Information Systems include Pumilio, a free and open source PHP/
mySQL application (http://pumilio.sourceforge.net)
developed at Purdue University and REAL (http://
real.msu.edu) developed at Michigan State University. Both are designed to manage large numbers of
sound files and allow researchers to query, analyze
and listen to files over the web (see also Mason et al.
2008).

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1213–1232

1227

Fig. 8 Soundscape
Information Systems
‘‘workbench’’ illustrating
the major features of an
end-to-end acoustic data
collection, management,
analysis and presentation
system

Soundscapes provide ecosystem services to humans
in the form of many life-fulfilling functions (Fisher
1998; Dumyahn and Pijanowski, in review a). An
important consideration for soundscape conservation
is that from these benefits, numerous values are
derived. Schafer (1994) likened soundscapes to the
acoustic manifestation of place and emphasized the
role sounds play in place attachment (Dumyahn and
Pijanowski, in review b). Many soundscapes also have
cultural, historical, recreational, aesthetic, and therapeutic values. Unique and natural soundscapes can be
subtle or powerful links for humans to their environment (Schafer 1994; Torigoe 2003; O’Connor 2008).
Soundscape conservation has the potential to be
more effective than noise mitigation (Dumyahn and
Pijanowski, in review b), since it accounts for the
integrative nature and multiple values of soundscapes. Expanding transportation systems and habitat
conversion are homogenizing many soundscapes
(Wrightson 2000; Miller 2008). Human dominated
land uses are decreasing biodiversity and have caused
species extinctions (Vitousek et al. 1997; Chapin
et al. 2000), which are reflected in biophony. In light
of the multitude of threats, unique and natural
soundscapes have been referred to as an endangered
resource. Indeed, the increasing loss of natural sounds
could be an indication of humans’ weakening

connection with nature (sensu Louv 2008). Schafer
(1994) argues that we need to improve our relationship with sound and actively listen to soundscapes to
truly appreciate them. Doing so will reunite humans
with sounds, and also inspire the appreciation,
management, and conservation of the organisms and
resources that create them.
Acknowledgements We would like to acknowledge funding
from Purdue’s Center of the Environment Seed Grant Program,
NSF III-CXT Program (0705836) and the Department of Forestry
and Natural Resources. This paper benefitted from input by
Kimberly Robinson, Brian Napoletano, Luis Villanueva-Rivera,
John Dunning, Jeff Dukes, Jeff Holland, Burak Pekin, and
NahNah Kim. Special thanks to George Hess and one anonymous
reviewer for very valuable input of a previous version of the
manuscript.

References
Adams M, Cox T, Moore G, Croxford B, Refaee M, Sharples S
(2006) Sustainable soundscapes: noise policy and urban
experience. Urban Stud 43(13):2385–2398
Ahola MT, Laaksonen T, Sippola K, Eeva T, Rainio K,
Lehikoinen E (2004) Variation in climate warming along
the migration route uncouples arrival and breeding dates.
Glob Change Biol 10:1610–1617
Allen FH (1913) More notes on the morning awakening. Auk
30:229–230

123

1228
Amoser S, Ladich F (2010) Year-round variability of ambient
noise in temperate freshwater habitats and its implications
for fishes. Aquat Sci 72:371–378
Amstrong EA (1963) A study of bird song. Oxford University
Press, Oxford
Baker M, Logue D (2003) Population differentiation in a
complex bird sound: a comparison of three bioacoustical
analysis procedures. Ethology 109(3):223–242
Barber JR, Conner WE (1997) Acoustic mimicry in a predatorprey interaction. Proc Nat Acad Sci 104(22):9331–9334
Barber JR, Crooks KR, Fristrup KM (2010) The costs of
chronic noise exposure for terrestrial organisms. Trends
Ecol Evol 25:180–189
Barker NK (2008) Bird song structure and transmission in the
neotropics: trend, methods, and future directions. Ornithol
Neotrop 19:175–199
Beebee TJC (2002) Amphibian breeding and climate. Nature
374:219–220
Berg KS, Brumfield RT, Apanius V (2006) Phylogenetic and
ecological determinants of the Neotropical dawn chorus.
Proc R Soc B 273:999–1005
Berglund B, Lindvall T (1995) Community noise. World
Health Organization, Stockholm
Blake BA, Blake JG (1992) Population variation in a tropical
bird community. BioScience 42(11):838–845
Blaustein AR, Belden LK, Olson DH, Green DM, Root TL,
Kiesecker JM (2001) Amphibian breeding and climate
change. Conserv Biol 15:1804–1809
Blomberg L, Schomer P, Wood E (2003) The interest of the
general public in a national noise policy. Noise Control
Eng J 51(3):172–175
Blumestein DT, Turner AC (2005) Can acoustic adaptation
hypothesis predict the structure of Australian birdsong?
Acta Ethol 15:35–44
Boncoraglio G, Saino N (2007) Habitat structure and the
evolution of bird song: a meta-analysis of the evidence for
the acoustic niche hypothesis. Funct Ecol 21:134–142
Both C, Visser M (2001) Adjustment to climate change is
constrained by arrival date in a long-distance migrant bird.
Nature 411:296–298
Botteldooren D, Coensel B, De Meur T (2004) The temporal
structure of the urban soundscape. J Sound Vib
292(1–2):105–123
Bradybury JW, Vehrencamp SL, Sunderland MA (1998)
Principles of animal communication. Sinauer Associates,
New York
Brown, JL, Shou-Hsien L, Bhagabati N (1999) Long-term trend
toward earlier breeding in an American bird: a response to
global warming? Proc Nat Acad Sci 96:5565–5569
Brown JH (2001) Mammals on mountainsides: elevational
patterns of diversity. Glob Ecol Biogeogr 10:101–109
Brown TJ, Handford P (2000) Sound design for vocalizations:
quality in the woods, consistency in the fields. Condor
102:81–92
Brown CH, Gomez R, Waser PM (1995) Old world monkey
vocalizations: adaptation to the local habitat? Anim Behav
50:945–961
Brumm H (2004) The impact of environmental noise on song
amplitude on a territorial bird. J Anim Ecol 73:434–440
Burt B, Vehrencamp SL (2005) Dawn chorus as an interactive
communication network. In: McGregor PK (ed) Animal

123

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1213–1232
communication networks. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK
Butler R, Servilla M, Gage S, Basney J, Welch V, Baker B,
Fleury T, Duda P, Gehrig D, Bletzinger M, Tao J, Freemon M (2006) CyberInfrastructure for the analysis of
ecological acoustic sensor data: a use case study in grid
deployment. Challenges of large applications in distributed environments. IEEE 25–33
Carles JL, Barrio IL, de Lucio JV (1999) Sound influence on
landscape values. Landsc Urban Plan 43:191–200
Chapin FS III, Zavaleta ES, Eviner VT, Naylor RL, Vitousek
PM, Reynolds HL, Hooper DU, Lavorel S, Sala OE,
Hobbie SE, Mack MC, Diaz S (2000) Consequences of
changing biodiversity. Nature 405(6783):234–242
Charif RA, Clapham PJ, Clark CW (2001) Acoustic detections
of singing humpback whales in deep waters off the British
Isles. Mar Mamm Sci 17(4):751–768
Chesmore D (2004) Automated bioacoustic identification of
species. Ann Braz Acad Sci 76(2):435–440
Coates PA (2005) The stillness of the past: toward an environmental history of sound and noise. Environ Hist
10(4):636–665
Collins JP, Storfer A (2003) Global amphibian declines: sorting the hypotheses. Divers Distrib 9:89–98
Collins SL, Bettencourt LMA, Hagberg A, Brown RF, Moore
DI, Bonito G, Delin KA, Jackson SP, Johnson DW,
Burleigh SC, Woodrow RR, McAuley JM (2006) New
opportunities in ecological sensing using wireless sensor
networks. Front Ecol Environ 4:402–407
Croll DA, Clark CW, Calambokidis J, Eillison WT, Tershy BR
(2001) Effect of anthropogenic low-frequency noise on
the foraging ecology of Balaenoptera whales. Anim
Conserv 4:13–27
Cuthill IC, Macdonald WA (1990) Experimental manipulation
of the dawn and dusk chorus in the blackbird Turdus
merula. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 26:209–216
Dale VH, Pearson SM, Offerman HL, O’Neill RV (1994)
Relating patterns of land use change to faunal biodiversity
in the central Amazon. Conserv Biol 8:1027–1036
De Coensel B, Botteldooren D (2006) The quiet rural soundscape and how to characterize it. Acta Acustica United
Acustica 92:887–897
De Coensel B, Botteldooren D (2007) Microsimulation based
corrections on the road traffic noise emission near intersections. Acta Acustica United Acustica 93:241–252
De Coensel B, De Muer T, Yperman I, Botteldooren D (2005)
The influence of traffic flow dynamics on urban soundscapes. Appl Acoust 66:175–194
De Sollar SR, Fernie KJ, Barrett GC, Bishop CA (2006)
Population trends and calling phenology of anuran populations surveyed in Ontario estimated using acoustic
surveys. Biodivers Conserv 15:3481–3497
Dubois D, Guastavino C, Raimbault M (2006) A cognitive
approach to urban soundscapes: using verbal data to
access everyday life auditory categories. Acta Acustica
United Acustica 92:865–874
Dumyahn SL, Pijanowski BC (in review a) Beyond noise
mitigation: managing soundscapes as common pool
resources. Landscape Ecol
Dumyahn SL, Pijanowski BC (in review b) Soundscape conservation. Landscape Ecol

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1213–1232
Endler JA (1992) Signals, signal conditions and the direction of
evolution. Am Nat 139:S125–S153
Endler JA (1993) Some general comments on the evolution and
design of animal communication systems. Philos Trans
Biol Sci 340:215–225
Farina A (2006) Principles and methods in landscape ecology.
Springer, NY
Farina A, Belgrano A (2006) The eco-field hypothesis: toward
a cognitive landscape. Landscape Ecol 21:5–17
Farina A, Napoletano B (2010) Rethinking the landscape: new
theoretical perspectives for a powerful agency. Biosemiotics 3:177–187
Feng AS, Schul J (2006) Sound processing in real-world
environments. In: Narins PM, Feng AS, Fay RR (eds)
Hearing and sound communication in amphibians.
Springer, NY
Ficken RW, Ficken MS, Hailman JP (1974) Temporal pattern
shifts to avoid acoustic interference in singing birds.
Science 183:762–763
Fisher JA (1998) What the hills are alive with: in defense of the
sounds of nature. J Aesthet Art Crit 56:167–179
Fletcher N (2007) Handbook of acoustics. In: Rossing TD (ed)
Animal bioacoustics. Springer, NY, pp 785–804
Foley JA, DeFries R, Asner GP, Barford C, Bonan G, Carpenter SR, Chapin FS III, Coe MT, Daily GC, Gibbs HK,
Helkowski JH, Holloway T, Howard EA, Kucharik CJ,
Monfreda C, Patz JA, Prentice IC, Ramankutty N, Snyder
PK (2005) Global consequences of land use. Science
309(5734):570–578
Forman RTT, Godron M (1981) Patches and structural components for a landscape ecology. BioScience 31:733–740
Forrest TG (1994) From sender to receiver: propagation and
environmental effects on acoustic signals. Am Zool
34:644–654
Fuller RA, Warren PH, Gaston KJ (2007) Daytime noise predicts nocturnal singing in urban robins. Biol Lett
3:368–370
Gage SH, Napoletano B, Cooper M (2001) Assessment of
ecosystem biodiversity by acoustic diversity indices.
J Acoust Soc Am 109(5):2430
Gage SH, Ummadi P, Shortridge A, Qi J, Jella P (2004) Using
GIS to develop a network of acoustic environmental
sensors. In: ESRI international conference, 2004, Aug
9–13. San Diego, CA
Gage SH, Joo W, Kasten E, Fox J, Biswas S (2011) Development of acoustic monitoring technology for ecological
investigations. Long term ecological network. KBS
synthesis
Garcia-Martino AR, Warner GS, Scantena FN, Civco DL
(1996) Rainfall, runoff and elevation relationships in the
Luquillo Mountains of Puerto Rico. Caribb J Sci
32(4):41–44
Garrioch D (2003) Sounds of the city: the soundscape of early
modern European towns. Urban Hist 30(1):5–25
Gaston KJ (2000) Global patterns of biodiversity. Nature
405:220–227
Gerhardt HC (1994) The evolution of vocalization in frogs and
toads. Annu Rev Ecol Syst 25:293–324
Gibbs JP, Breisch AR (2001) Climate warming and calling
phenology of frogs near Ithaca, New York, 1900–1999.
Conserv Biol 15:1175–1178

1229
Grafe TU (1996) The function of call alteration in the African
reed frog (Hyperolius marmoratus): precise call timing
prevents auditory masking. Behav Ecol Sociobiol
38:149–158
Greenewalt CH (1968) Bird song: acoustics and physiology.
Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, DC
Greenfield MD (1994) Cooperation and conflict in the evolution of signal interactions. Annu Rev Ecol Syst 25:97–126
Guastavino C (2006) The ideal urban soundscape: investigating
the sound quality of French cities. Acta Acustica United
Acustica 92:945–951
Guastavino C (2007) Categorization of environmental sounds.
Can J Exp Psychol 61(1):54–63
Gwinner E, Brandstätter R (2001) Complex bird clocks. Philos
Trans R Soc Lond B 356:1801–1810
Hardouin LA, Robert D, Bretagnolle V (2008) A dusk chorus
effect in a nocturnal bird: support for mate and rival
assessment functions. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 62:1909–1918
Härmä A (2003) Automated identification of bird species based
on sinusoidal modeling of syllables. In: IEEE ICASSP,
pp 545–548
Hartmann WM (1997) Signals, sound and sensation. American
Institute of Physics, NY
Heaney JP (2001) Research needs to quantify the impacts of
urbanization of streams ASCE conference proceedings.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1061/40602(263)27
Hillebrand H (2004) On the generality of the latitudinal
diversity gradient. Am Nat 163(2):192–211
Hobbs RJ (1993) Effects of landscape fragmentation on ecosystem processes in the Western Australian wheat belt.
Biol Conserv 64:193–201
Hutchinson JMC (2002) Two explanations of the dawn chorus
compared: how monotonically changing light levels
favour a short break from singing. Anim Behav
64:527–539
Isard SA, Gage SH (2001) Flow of life in the atmosphere: an
airscape approach to understanding invasive organisms.
Michigan State University Press, MI
James FC, Wamer NO (1982) Relationships between temperate
forest bird communities and vegetation structure. Ecology
63(1):159–171
Jeon JY, Lee JP, You J (2010) Perceptual assessment of quality
of urban soundscapes with combined noise sources and
water sounds. J Acoust Soc Am 127(3):1357–1366
Kacelink A, Krebs JR (1982) The dawn chorus in the great tit
(Parus major): proximate and ultimate causes. Behaviour
83:287–309
Kalevi K, Deacon T, Emmeche C, Hoffmeyer J, Stjernfelt F
(2009) Theses on biosemiotics: prolegomena to a theoretical biology. Biol Theory: Integr Dev Evol Cognit
4(2):167–173
Karr JR, Roth RR (1971) Vegetation structure and avian
diversity in several New World areas. Am Nat
105:423–435
Kasten E, McKinley P, Gage S (2010) Ensemble Extraction for
Classification and Detection of Bird Species. Ecol Inform
5:153–166
Katti M, Warren PH (2003) Tits, noise and urban bioacoustics.
Trends Ecol Evol 19(3):109–110
Klæboe R, Engelien E, Steinnes M (2006) Context sensitive
noise impact mapping. Appl Acoust 67:620–642

123

1230
Krause BL (1987) Bioacoustics, habitat ambience in ecological
balance. Whole Earth Rev 57:14–18
Krause BL (2002) Wild soundscapes: discovering the voice of
the natural world. Wild Sanctuary Books, Berkeley
Kroodsma DE, Haver N (2005) The singing life of birds: the art
and science of listening to birdsong. Houghton Mifflin,
Boston
Kroodsma DE, Miller EH, Oullet H (1982) Acoustic communication in birds: production. perception and design features of sounds Academic Press, New York
Kull RC (2006) Natural and urban soundscapes: the need for a
multi-disciplinary approach. Acta Acustica United Acustica 92:898–902
Lambin EF, Giest HJ (2006) Land-use and land-cover change:
local processes and global impacts. Springer, NY
Laurance WF (2004) Forest-climate interactions in fragmented
tropical landscapes. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B
359:345–352
Laurance WF, Nascimento HEM, Laurance SG, Andrade A,
Ewers RM, Harms KE, Luizao RCC, Ribeiro JE (2007)
Habitat fragmentation, variable edge effects and the
landscape-divergence hypothesis. PLoS ONE 10:e1017
Lavandier C (2006) The contribution of sound source characteristics in the assessment of urban soundscapes. Acta
Acustica United Acustica 92:912–921
Leopold A (1933) Game management. Charles Scribner and
Sons, New York, p 481
Leopold A, Eynon A (1961) Avian daybreak and evening song
in relation to time and light intensity. Condor 63:269–293
Liu J, Dietz T, Carpenter SR, Alberti M, Folke C, Moran E,
Pell AN, Deadman P, Kratz T, Lubchenco J, Ostrom E,
Ouyang Z, Provencher W, Redman CL, Schneider SH,
Taylor WW (2007) Complexity of coupled human and
natural systems. Science 317:1513–1516
Lomolino MV (2001) Elevational gradients of species-diversity: historical perspective views. Glob Ecol Biogeogr
10(1):3–13
Lomolino MV, Sax DF, Brown JH (eds) (2004) Foundations of
biogeography. University of Chicago Press, IL
Louv R (2008) Last child in the woods: saving our children from
nature-deficit disorder. Algonquin Books, Chapel Hill
Lovejoy TE, Bierregaard RO Jr, Rylands AB, Quiteal CE,
Harper LH, Brown KS Jr, Powell A, Shubart OR, Hays
MB (1986) Edge and other effects of isolation on Amazon
forest fragments. In: Soulé ME (ed) Conservation biology:
the science of scarcity and diversity. Sinauer and Associates, Sunderland, MA, USA, pp 257–285
MacArthur RH (1964) Environmental factors affecting bird
species diversity. Am Nat 98:387–412
MacArthur RH, MacArthur JW (1961) On bird species diversity. Ecology 42:594–598
Marler P, Slabberkoorn H (2004) Nature’s music: the science
of birdsong. Elsevier Academic Press, San Diego, CA
Marten K, Quine D, Marler P (1977) Sound-transmission and
its significance for animal vocalization II. Tropical forest
habitats. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 2:291–302
Matsinos YG, Mazaris AD, Papadimitriou KD, Mniestris A,
Hatzigiannidis G, Maioglou D, Pantis JD (2008) Spatiotemporal variability in human and natural sounds in a
rural landscape. Landscape Ecol 23:945–959

123

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1213–1232
Mason R, Roe P, Towsey M, Zhang J, Gibson J, Gage SH
(2008) Towards an acoustic environmental observatory.
In: 4th IEEE international conference on e-science. Indianapolis, IN
McIlraith AL, Card HC (1997) Bird song identification using
artificial neural networks and statistical analysis electrical
and computer engineering, 1997. In: IEEE 1997 Canadian
conference on electrical and computer engineering, St.
Johns, Newfoundland, Canada, 5 May 1997–28 May 1997
McIntyre NE (1995) Effects of forest patch size on avian
diversity. Landscape Ecol 10(2):85–99
Miller NP (2008) US national parks and management of park
soundscapes: a review. Appl Acoust 69:77–92
Miller DR, Lin JD, Lu Z (1991) Some effects of surrounding
forest canopy architecture on the wind field in small
clearings. For Ecol Manag 45:79–91
Mitani JC, Stuht J (1998) The evolution of nonhuman primate
loud calls: acoustic adaptation for long-distance transmission. Primates 39(2):171–182
Morton ES (1975) Ecological sources of selection on avian
sounds. Am Nat 109:17–34
National Park Service (2006) National park service management policies. Washington, DC
O’Connor P (2008) The sound of silence: valuing acoustics in
heritage conservation. Geogr Res 46(3):361–373
Otte D (1992) Evolution of cricket songs. J Orthoptera Res
1:25–49
Ouis D (2001) Annoyance from road traffic noise: a review.
J Environ Psychol 21(1):101–120
Papdimitriou K, Mazarois A, Kallimanis A, Pantis J (2009)
Cartographic representation of the sonic environment.
Cartogr J 46(2):126–135
Parmesan C (2006) Ecological and evolutionary responses to
recent climate change. Annu Rev Ecol Evol Syst
37:637–669
Parmesan C (2007) Influences of species, latitudes and methodologies on estimates of phonological response to global
warming. Glob Change Biol 13:1806–1872
Parris KM, Schneider A (2009) Impacts of traffic noise and
traffic volume on birds of roadside habitats. Ecol Soc
14(1):29
Patricelli GL, Blickley JL (2006) Avian communication in
urban noise: causes and consequences of vocal adjustment. Auk 123(3):639–649
Payne R, Webb D (1971) Orientation by means of long range
acoustic signaling in baleen whales. Ann N Y Acad Sci
188:110–141
Persi SJ, Pescador M (2004) Effects of traffic noise on passerine populations in Mediterranean wooded pastures.
Appl Acoust 65:357–366
Pickett STA, Cadenasso ML (1995) Landscape ecology: spatial
heterogeneity in ecological systems. Science 269:331–334
Pijanowski BC, Villanueva-Rivera LJ, Dumyahn SL, Farina A,
Krause B, Napoletano BM, Gage SH, Pieretti N (2011).
Soundscape ecology: the science of sound in the landscape. BioScience 61(3):203–216
Porter J, Arzberger P, Braun H, Bryant P, Gage S, Hansen T,
Hanson P, Lin C, Lin F, Kratz T, Michener W, Shapiro S,
Williams T (2005) Wireless sensor networks for ecology.
BioScience 55:561–572

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1213–1232
Qi J, Gage SH, Joo W, Napoletano B, Biswas S (2008)
Soundscape characteristics of an environment: a new
ecological indicator of ecosystem health. In: Ji W (ed)
Wetland and water resource modeling and assessment.
CRC Press, New York, New York, USA, pp 201–211
Raimbault M (2006) Qualitative judgments of urban soundscapes: questioning questionnaires and semantic scales.
Acta Acustica United Acustica 92:929–937
Raimbault M, Dubois D (2005) Urban soundscapes: experiences and knowledge. Cities 22(5):339–350
Richards DG, Wiley RH (1980) Reverberations and amplitude
fluctuations in the propagation of sound in a forest: implications for animal communication. Am Nat 115(3):381–399
Rickelfs RE (2004) A comprehensive framework for global
patterns in biodiversity. Ecol Lett 7:1–15
Riede K (1993) Monitoring biodiversity: analysis of Amazonian rainforest sounds. Ambio 22(8):546–548
Ries L, Fletcher RJ, Battin J, Sisk TD (2004) Biological
responses to habitat edges: mechanisms, models and
variability explained. Annu Rev Ecol Evol Syst
35:491–522
Rotenberry JT, Wiens JA (1980) Habitat structure, patchiness
and avian communities in North American steppe vegetation. A multivariate analysis. Ecology 61(5):1228–1250
Rothschild FS (1962) Laws of symbolic mediation in the
dynamics of the self and personality. Ann N Y Acad Sci
96(3):774–784
Ryan MJ, Brenowitz EA (1985) The role of body size, phylogeny, and ambient noise in the evolution of bird song.
Am Nat 126:87–100
Saunders A (1947) The seasons of bird song: the beginning of
song in spring. Auk 64(1):97–107
Saunders A (1948) The seasons of bird song—the cessation of
song after the nesting season. Auk 65(1):19–30
Schafer RM (1977) Tuning of the world. Alfred Knopf, NY
Schafer RM (1994) The soundscape: the tuning of the world.
Inner Traditions International Limited, Rochester
Seddon N, Tobias JA (2007) Song divergence at the edge of
Amazonia: an empirical test of the peripatric speciation
model. Biol J Linn Soc 90:173–188
Siemann E, Tilman D, Haarstad J, Ritchie M (1998) Experimental tests of the dependence of arthropod diversity on
plant diversity. Am Nat 152(5):738–750
Slabbekoorn H, Peet M (2003) Birds sing at higher pitch in
urban noise. Nature 424:267
Slabbekoorn H, Ripmeester EAP (2008) Birdsong and
anthropogenic noise: implications and applications for
conservation. Mol Ecol 17(1):72–83
Southworth M (1969) The sonic environment of cities. Environ
Behav 1:49–70
Stansfeld S, Matheson MP (2003) Noise pollution: non-auditory effects on health. Br Med Bull 68:243–257
Staples SL (1996) Public policy and environmental noise:
modeling exposure or understanding effects. Am J Public
Health 87(12):2063–2067
Stephens RWB, Bate AE (1966) Acoustics and vibrational
physics, 2nd edn. Edward Arnold Publishers, London
Sueur J (2002) Cicada acoustic communication: potential
sound partitioning in a multi-species community from
Mexico. Biol J Linn Soc 75:379–394

1231
Sueur J, Aubin T, Simonis C (2008a) Seewave: a free modular tool
for sound analysis and synthesis. Bioacoustics 18:213–226
Sueur J, Pavoine S, Hamerlynck O, Duvail S (2008b) Rapid
acoustic survey for biodiversity appraisal. PLoS ONE
3:e4065
Swanson FJ, Kratz TK, Caine N, Woodmansee RG (1988)
Landform effects on ecosystem patterns and processes.
BioScience 38(2):92–98
Terborgh J (1977) Bird species diversity on an Andean elevational gradient. Ecology 58:1007–1019
Torigoe K (2003) Insights taken from three visited soundscapes
in Japan. In: Proceedings of the world forum for acoustic
ecology symposium, March 19–23, 2003, Melbourne,
Australia
Trifa VM, Kirschel ANG, Taylor CE, Vallejo EE (2008)
Automated species recognition of antbirds in a Mexican
rainforest using hidden Markov models. J Acoust Soc Am
123:2424–2431
Truax B (1978) The world soundscape project’s handbook for
acoustic ecology. ARC Publications, Vancouver, BC
Truax B (1999) Handbook of acoustic ecology. CD-ROM
version, 2nd edn. Cambridge Street Publishing, Burnaby
Truax B, Barrett GW (in review) Preface: the soundscape in a
context of landscape ecology. Landscape Ecol
Turner MG (1987) Spatial simulation of landscape changes in
Georgia: a comparison of three transition models. Landscape Ecol 1:29–36
Turner MG (1989) Landscape ecology: the effect of pattern on
process. Annu Rev Ecol Syst 20:171–197
Turner BL II, Clark WC, Kates RW, Richard JF, Mathews JT,
Meyer WB (1990) Earth as transformed by human action:
global and regional changes in the biosphere over the past
300 years. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Turner MG, Gardner RH (1991) Quantitative methods in
landscape ecology: the analysis and interpretation of
landscape heterogeneity. Springer, New York, NY
Turner MG, Gardner RH, O’Neill RV (2001) Landscape
ecology in theory and practice: pattern and process.
Springer Press, New York
Urban DL, O’Neill RV, Shugart HH (1987) Landscape ecology. BioScience 37:119–127
Vasconcelos RO, Amorim MCP, Ladich F (2007) Effects of
ship noise on the detectability of communication signals
in the Lusitanian toadfish. J Exp Biol 210:2104–2112
Villanueva-Rivera LJ, Pijanowski BC, Doucette JS, Pekin BK
(in review). A primer of acoustics for landscape ecologists. Landscape Ecol
Vitousek PM, Mooney HJ, Hand Lubchenco J, Melillo J (1997)
Human domination of earth’s ecosystems. Science
277:494–499
Vos CC, Berry P, Opdam P, Baveco H, Nijhof B, O’Hanley J,
Bell C, Kuipers H (2008) Adapting landscapes to climate
change: examples of climate-proof ecosystem networks
and priority adaptation zones. J Appl Ecol 45:1722–1731
Walker TJ (1962) Factors responsible for intraspecific variation
in the calling songs of crickets. Evolution 16(4):407–428
Walker TJ (1969) Acoustic synchrony: two mechanisms in the
snowy tree cricket. Science 166:891–894
Walker TJ (1974) Character displacement and acoustic insects.
Am Zool 14:1137–1150

123

1232
Walker TJ (1975) Effects of temperature on rates in poikilothermic nervous systems: evidence from the calling songs
of meadow katydids and reanalysis of published data.
J Comp Physiol 101(1):57–69
Warren PS, Katti M, Ermann M, Brazel A (2006) Urban bioacoustics: it’s not just noise. Anim Behav 71(3):491–502
Wascher D, Opdam P (2004) Climate change meets habitat
fragmentation: linking landscape and biogeographical
scale levels in research and conservation. Biol Conserv
117(3):285–297
Webster DB, Fay RR, Popper NA (1992) The evolutionary
biology of hearing. Springer, New York
Wiens JA (1992) What is landscape ecology, really? Landscape Ecol 7(3):149–150
Wiens JA, Donoghue MJ (2004) Historical biogeography ecology and species richness. Trends Ecol Evol 19(12):639–644
Wiens JA, Milne BT (1989) Scaling of ‘landscapes’ in landscape ecology, or, landscape ecology from a beetle’s
perspective. Landscape Ecol 3:87–96

123

Landscape Ecol (2011) 26:1213–1232
Williams KS, Simon C (1995) The ecology behavior and
evolution of periodical cicadas. Annu Rev Entomol
40:269–295
Wollerman L (1999) Acoustic interference limits call detection
in a Neotropical frog Hyla ebraccata. Anim Behav
57:529–536
Wood WE, Yezerinac SM (2006) Song sparrow (Melospiza
melodia) song varies with urban noise. Auk 123(3):650–659
Wrightson K (2000) An introduction to acoustic ecology
soundscape. J Acoust Ecol 1:10–13
Wysocki LE, Davidson JW III, Smith ME, Frankel AS, Ellison
WT, Mazik PM, Popper AN, Bebak J (2007) Effects of
aquaculture production noise on hearing, growth and disease
resistance of rainbow trout. Aquaculture 272(1–4):687–697
Yang W, Kang J (2005) Soundscape and sound preferences in
urban squares: a case study in Sheffield. J Urban Des
10(1):61–80
Zonneveld IS, Forman RTT (1990) Changing landscapes: an
ecological perspective. Springer, NY

