NEWSFOCUS

Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on April 24, 2014

NEWSFOCUS

Eavesdropping on Ecosystems
Researchers are collecting terabytes of recordings, from bird chirps to chainsaw roars.
The emerging ﬁeld of soundscape ecology has a lot to offer … and a lot to prove

834

other animal populations to patterns of soundscape ecologists are trying to describe
land management in Germany’s forests and the cacophony of entire landscapes,
grasslands. “It would be really cool,” he including nonbiological sounds such as
says, to use sound as a convenient proxy for rushing water, thunderclaps, and even the
measuring biodiversity.
drone of cars and airplanes.
Scheren-Lorenzen isn’t the
They hope to f ind more
only researcher enticed by the
efﬁcient ways to characterize an
emerging field of soundscape sciencemag.org
ecosystem than spending countSound clips and
ecology. Advances in cheap,
less hours tromping through,
podcast intertough automated recorders view with author Kelly
and potentially disturbing, the
and powerful sound-analysis Servick (http://scim.ag/ landscape. Instead, they aim to
software are inspiring scientists pod_6173).
ﬁnd unique patterns hidden in the
to launch increasingly ambitious
acoustic realm—and then track
efforts that use sound to document and how they change in response to disruptions,
analyze ecosystems. Rather than focus on such as increasing air trafﬁc or construction
the calls of one or a few species at a time—as projects, the arrival of invasive species,
in many traditional bioacoustics projects— or the gradual effects of climate change.

21 FEBRUARY 2014

Online

VOL 343 SCIENCE www.sciencemag.org
Published by AAAS

CREDIT: KRISTOFFER AHLM

MICHAEL SCHERER-LORENZEN WAS ONE
of 80 scientists appealing for funding
from the German Science Foundation at a
review meeting in Potsdam, Germany, last
November. But his pitch was the only one
that began with the harsh, throaty sounds of
barking roe deer.
The midnight recording lasted just a
few seconds, but it demonstrated exactly
the kind of data the University of Freiburg
researcher proposed to collect with a network of 300 microphones scattered across
Germany. Each would record 1 minute of
sound every hour for a year, he explained,
capturing nearly 44,000 hours in all. The
payoff: detailed “soundscapes” that could
help researchers relate bird, insect, and

NEWSFOCUS
Ears in the sky. Soundscape ecologist Bryan
Pijanowski installs a fuzzy microphone on a research
tower in Borneo earlier this year.

Researchers want to quantify “what we
experience ourselves as we go through the
day and listen,” says soundscape ecologist
Bryan Pijanowski of Purdue University in
West Lafayette, Indiana.
But studying whole soundscapes poses
major technical and conceptual challenges.
Researchers are struggling to ﬁnd practical
ways to boil down huge collections of
digital recordings into something they can
use. Converting complex soundscapes
into relatively simple numerical indices
of biodiversity is proving difficult. And
soundscape ecologists have sometimes
strained to persuade their colleagues, who
may see little original in the approach,
that large-scale networks of microphones
can tell a meaningful story. Not that long
ago, “there were many in the bioacoustics
community that just said ‘No, no, no! This
is not a new idea at all,’ ” Pijanowski says.
Sound foundations
Scientists have long observed how animals
produce and perceive sound, and analyzed
their communication patterns. The first
field recordings of birdsong date back
nearly a century. But for the most part,
bioacoustics studies focused on individual
species, mining a recording for particular
calls of interest.
That species-level approach misses the
forest for the trees, says Bernie Krause,
a studio musician-turned-natural sound
recordist who is often credited
with developing the concepts
behind modern soundscape
ecology. “This reductionist,
detached, and fragmented
way of looking at the world is
really incoherent,” he says.
Instead, Krause has proposed a theory of “acoustic
partitioning,” which he ﬁrst
published in the magazine
Whole Earth Review in 1987.
Inspired by the complex
soundscapes he heard in
Kenya while collecting sound
for a science museum exhibit,
he suggested that natural
sound be viewed as a resource shared
among vocal organisms, like a nesting
habitat or a food supply. An animal must
carve out its own aural niche, he wrote, for
example by using a signature frequency or
by signaling at a particular time of day, to

avoid interference from other sounds.
In Krause’s view, a healthy ecosystem
would be clearly partitioned into niches by
frequency or time. In contrast, a disrupted
area would have gaps at some frequencies,
where species had been lost. And when

of frequencies in their recordings, the
pair broke the soundscape into three
components: “biophony,” or wild animal
sounds (usually found at high frequencies);
“geophony,” or geophysical sounds like
wind, rain, and rushing water (which

Bat

Insects

Birds

Orangutan

Everything in its place. A recording from the Sumatran rainforest illustrates the acoustic niche hypothesis,
in which different kinds of animals utilize different parts of the sound spectrum. Bats, for instance, call at
higher frequencies while orangutans use lower frequency sound.

invasive newcomers or human-generated
sounds intrude on a niche, the existing
patterns might shift.
Many scientists were skeptical, seeing
only anecdotal evidence for the theory. “It
was completely rejected as a nice, aesthetic
idea,” Krause recalls. “But then, to be fair,
I really didn’t have, at the time, a way to
express what I was ﬁnding … in the language
of [scientiﬁc] publications.”
But the idea intrigued some researchers,
including Stuart Gage, a soundscape

stretch across a wide frequency range); and
“anthrophony,” or human-produced sounds
(generally lower frequency).
Gage developed computer programs that
quantified the amount of acoustic energy
within certain frequency ranges; then he
and Krause set out to compare natural and
human-created sounds in a landscape.
The effort was labor intensive. The pair
gathered their soundscapes in California’s
Sequoia National Park using nearly
5 kilograms of recording equipment, which
they had to babysit in the
ﬁeld. Its drawbacks became
abundantly clear one evening,
Gage recalls, when he found
himself standing alone in a
meadow waiting for a curious
black bear to ﬁnish molesting
the recorder he’d placed on a
nearby rock. “He smelled it,
he licked it, he slobbered all
over it,” Gage says. “Then he
whacked it.”
Luckily, the bear didn’t
—Bryan Pijanowski,
break it; his muffled snorts
and loud smack were
Purdue University
immortalized in the recording.
But Gage and others were
ecologist and professor emeritus at already dreaming of systems that would be
Michigan State University in East Lansing less likely to draw a bear’s attention: small
and one of the ﬁeld’s earliest champions. recorders that could be hidden in the ﬁeld
In the early 2000s, he worked with Krause for weeks or months at a time, collecting
to develop what he calls “a taxonomy hours of high-ﬁdelity sound with almost no
of sound.” By analyzing the distribution human supervision. He began experimenting

CREDIT: BERNIE KRAUSE

“This is a science that’s
plagued by the big data
challenges that you see in,
say, genetics.”

www.sciencemag.org SCIENCE VOL 343
Published by AAAS

21 FEBRUARY 2014

835

NEWSFOCUS

A magic number?
Sueur was among the ﬁrst researchers to
seize on the new recorders to scale up his
studies, hoping to show that sound could be
a proxy for biodiversity. Sueur and his colleagues weren’t interested in exactly which
species were calling. Instead, he says they
wanted “to take a global measure of the

Planting ears. Engineer Philippe Gaucher uses a
crossbow to hang a microphone from the forest canopy in French Guiana. A recorder (blue box, right) is
mounted on a tree.

acoustic output of the community.” Their
goal was an algorithm that could boil hours
of acoustic data down to a single number
describing how an ecosystem’s acoustic
energy is distributed across the frequency
spectrum and over time.
Sueur’s team named their measure the
Acoustic Entropy Index. It is based on
what’s called a Shannon index, which turns
an inventory of the animals sighted in an

area into an estimate of species diversity. In
Sueur’s index, sounds at various frequencies
take the place of animal species. A single,
pure tone, for example, scores close to
zero, representing low acoustic diversity.
A noisy, chaotic, and more diverse soundscape should approach the highest possible
score of 1.
In 2007, Sueur’s team ran their ﬁrst realworld test of the index in Tanzania, recording
dawn and dusk sounds over several days in
two coastal forests that are separated by
50 kilometers—and a lot of history. Loggers
had exploited one for decades, but had been
cutting trees in the other for just a few years.
Sure enough, in a 2008 paper the team
reported that the less disturbed forest had
signiﬁcantly higher acoustic entropy scores
than the logged forest.
Since then, soundscape ecologists have
developed a bouquet of indices based on
different properties of the soundscape.
At the University of Urbino in Italy,
Almo Farina has developed an Acoustic
Complexity Index based on sound qualities
that can distinguish animal vocalizations
from human-generated noise: Many animal
sounds exhibit quick spikes in intensity
(think of the abrupt crescendo of a bird’s
song) while many human-generated sounds,
such as a droning engine, remain ﬂat.
From Sueur’s group came an Acoustic
Dissimilarity Index, which compares two
ecosystems based on differences in the
timing and frequency of their sounds. In
ﬁeld tests, the index provided a ready way
to estimate the number of species found in
one community but not in the other.

The acoustic arsenal
Such acoustic measures can be powerful tools, but have their pitfalls, says
Aaron Rice, director of the Bioacoustics Research Program at Cornell University. Many indices assume that biological sounds have shorter durations
than humanmade ones. But in Rice’s own
marine acoustics research, the punctuated
bursts of seismic air guns used for oil and
gas exploration were a problematic exception. His conclusion: Indices are most useful when researchers have a good sense
of the sources of sound they are likely
to encounter. “Going into a place where
you’re recording somewhat blindly may
not work,” he warns.
Similar limitations plague Sueur’s
Living reef
Dying reef
Acoustic Entropy Index, which turned
Visible decline. In visualizations of underwater recordings from Fiji, the spectrum from a healthy reef out to be highly sensitive to humanmade
includes ﬁsh activity in the top half of the image. A nearby dying reef features mostly low-frequency background noise. In fact, Sueur no
ocean waves.
longer believes he can create a single

836

21 FEBRUARY 2014

VOL 343 SCIENCE www.sciencemag.org
Published by AAAS

CREDITS (TOP TO BOTTOM): JÉRÔME SUEUR AND AMANDINE GASC; BERNIE KRAUSE (2)

with automated setups, connecting
recording gear to laptop computers, but
these were prohibitively bulky, powerhungry, and fragile.
Such problems caught the attention
of Ian Agranat, an entrepreneur and
technologist with an interest in birdsong.
In 2003, Agranat had founded a company
called Wildlife Acoustics, planning to
make hand-held recorders for amateur
bird enthusiasts. But he soon spotted a
more promising market: scientists. Field
recording equipment was “cobbled together
by biologists who … knew a little bit about
technology,” he recalls. In 2007, he offered
something better: the Song Meter, a $600
weatherproof recorder in a lunchbox-sized
metal case. When Gage ﬁrst saw one, he
decided he could “stop being an engineer
and go back to being an ecologist.” Agranat
has since sold more than 12,000 of the
devices to researchers in some 60 countries.
The Song Meter now has plenty of
company. Researchers can deploy a variety
of powerful yet affordable sensors, some
emphasizing portability, others designed
for specific frequency ranges or extreme
environments. Such technologies mark “the
start of the story” for soundscape science,
says Jérôme Sueur, an ecologist at the
National Museum of Natural History in Paris.

NEWSFOCUS
acoustic measure that is a reliable proxy for
biodiversity. The “index is not a miracle,” he
says. “It would be stupid to try to summarize
everything with a single value.”
Sueur does believe, however, that
acoustic indices could become a useful
element of a complete ecosystem portrait,
especially when they are correlated with
other indicators. For instance, Purdue’s
Pijanowski—once a graduate student
under Gage—has discovered a relationship
between acoustic diversity and vegetation
structure. His team planted sound recorders
at 14 sites in the Costa Rican rainforest
and compared features of the soundscape
with vegetation data from light detection
and ranging (LiDAR) surveys. Hot spots
for vocal species turned out to correlate
with patches of forest with large gaps in
the upper canopy and dense foliage in the
lower canopy, the researchers reported in a
2012 paper.
Such results make Pijanowski optimistic
that sound recordings could someday shape
management decisions by highlighting
especially rich habitats or helping explain

Noon

1

3

2

1. Crickets

2. Dawn chorus

Day in the life. A false-color spectrogram made from a recording in the Australian bushland highlights the
daily variation in the soundscape. Colors indicate values drawn from three acoustic indices, each sensitive to
different types of sound. The chirps of crickets dominate between dusk and dawn. As the sun rises, a bird call
chorus ﬁlls the air. Rainstorms strike in the afternoon; the black, low-frequency marks at the bottom of the
image are produced by waterdrops hitting the recorder.

Perils of the long view
The boom in sound-recording studies poses
a challenge familiar in other ﬁelds: a glut of
data. Pijanowsky’s lab alone has amassed
about 85 terabytes of sound—more than
100,000 hours—in just 5 years. “This is a
science that’s plagued by the big data challenges that you see in, say, genetics,” he
says. Many researchers already have libraries of ﬁeld recordings that, if played in real
time, would be longer than their careers.

June
May
April
March
Feb.
Jan.
Dec.
Nov.
Oct.

Dawn

24 Hours

Dusk

CREDITS: COURTESY OF MICHAEL TOWSEY (2)

Zoom out. Computer scientist Michael Towsey combines 8 months of continuous recordings at a research
station in Brisbane, Australia, into a single image. Colors indicate different acoustic indices. At dawn (left
curve), a morning bird chorus (blue) is obvious during the Australian spring and early summer (October
through December), but fades later in the year. Horizontal green streaks indicate heavy rainfall in January
and February. At dusk (right curve), cicada activity is evident in the spring and summer months (green); by
winter, the night is increasingly silent.

which features of a landscape support
particular animal communities. In the last
year, he says, there’s been an “explosion
of people who are willing to think like this
—more holistically.” One recent convert,
Anne Axel of Marshall University,
Huntington, in West Virginia, is using sound
recordings to predict whether abandoned
coal mines on Appalachian mountaintops
still have potential value as habitats. She
hopes to ﬁnd out how the acoustic signatures
of these pseudograsslands compare with
their state “prior to people chopping off the
tops of the mountains.”

3. Rainstorms

“We know that we’re not going to be able
to listen to it all,” says computer scientist
Michael Towsey of the Queensland University of Technology in Brisbane, Australia.
To get around that problem, he’s
developing ways to navigate soundscapes
by sight, creating color-coded spectrograms
that trained eyes can interpret at a glance (see
graphic). Towsey describes the visualizations
as “acoustic weather” charts. Some show
how the spectrum of sounds shifts over
a single day, while others assemble daily
records into long-term snapshots to capture
changes between seasons or years. That’s

www.sciencemag.org SCIENCE VOL 343
Published by AAAS

akin to studying the “acoustic climate,” he
notes. And “when we start thinking about the
acoustic climate, then we can start thinking
about acoustic climate change.” Year-toyear comparisons could eventually highlight
subtle and potentially problematic changes,
he predicts, such as changing rain patterns
or shifts in bird activity.
Proving grounds
To enable such long-term efforts, some
soundscape researchers are eager to piggyback on existing ecological surveys, which
can be large and relatively well funded. In
the United States, biological oceanographer
Susan Parks of Syracuse University in New
York hopes to get acoustic sensors installed
at the 106 sites planned for the National Ecological Observatory Network—an ambitious
monitoring effort by the National Science
Foundation that will fully launch in 2017. So
far, however, Parks has the go-ahead to put
her own recorders at just four sites. “The onus
is upon me to show people that it would be a
valuable research tool,” Parks says. To do so,
she will spend 2 years gathering and analyzing recordings to measure human-generated
sound and ﬁnd seasonal patterns in birdsong.
Meanwhile, in Germany, SchererLorenzen is strategizing about his first
acoustic project. Thirty years after Bernie
Krause ﬁrst advanced his niche hypothesis,
many soundscape experiments remain
isolated case studies. Scherer-Lorenzen
plans to take a broader view. By recording
at locations where researchers funded by
Germany’s Biodiversity Exploratories have
already collected data on ﬂora and fauna,
he aims to see how well soundscape indices
describe biodiversity across multiple
landscapes. He expects the German
Science Foundation to reach a verdict on
his proposal in March. By April, he hopes
to be out sprinkling microphones across the
German countryside.

21 FEBRUARY 2014

–KELLY SERVICK

837

