Global Environmental Change 28 (2014) 63–74

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Global Environmental Change
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/gloenvcha

Human and policy dimensions of soundscape ecology
Jordan W. Smith a,*, Bryan C. Pijanowski b
a
b

Center for Geospatial Analytics, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695, United States
Human-Environment Modeling and Analysis Laboratory, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, United States

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Article history:
Received 11 June 2013
Received in revised form 21 May 2014
Accepted 29 May 2014
Available online 5 July 2014

Soundscape ecology is an emergent and potentially transformative scientiﬁc discipline. However, the
majority of research within the ﬁeld has been conducted by natural scientists focused on quantifying the
characteristics and dynamics of soundscapes and examining their effect on non-human biota. A more
holistic approach to the science and management of soundscapes requires full integration with the social
and policy sciences. To facilitate the development of this integration, we propose an integrative human
and policy dimensions of soundscape ecology framework that conceptualizes the complex and dynamic
relationships between humans and their acoustic environments. The framework is grounded in four
distinct disciplines – health, psychology, economics and anthropology – that have used different
methodologies and metrics to focus on certain aspects of human–soundscape interactions. We provide a
review of previous empirical research within each of these ﬁelds. Along the way, we identify unexplored
avenues of discipline-speciﬁc research that can further the ﬁeld of soundscape ecology. The human and
policy dimensions of soundscape ecology framework provide the logic and structure upon which an
interdisciplinary body of scholarship can be built in the future. We conclude by utilizing our review and
integrative framework to propose speciﬁc focused soundscape policy and management recommendations. We argue the anthropogenic dominance of soundscapes can be mitigated through more proactive,
integrative and holistic soundscape policies and management practices.
ß 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords:
Coupled natural and human systems
Feedback loops
Bioacoustics
Psychoacoustics
Noise and health

1. Introduction
Soundscape ecology is an emergent and potentially transformative scientiﬁc discipline (Servick, 2014). The ﬁeld originated in the
1970s, grounded in the hypothesis that ‘‘every location on earth has
a unique acoustical bio-spectrum that provides information on the
dynamics of ecosystems in that place’’ (Krause, 1987, p. 15).
Individual non-human species were suggested to occupy an aural
niche within a speciﬁc geographic location. This hypothesis was a
dramatic departure from previous bioacoustics research focused
solely on single-animal vocalizations given it suggested the acoustic
properties of individual locations play an integral role in ecosystem
structure and functioning (Farina, 2014a). By collecting acoustic
recordings of speciﬁc locations over time, soundscape ecologists
believed they could better understand how certain changes in
anthropogenic, biological and geophysical sounds affect the health
of an ecosystem (e.g., biological diversity, provisioning of ecosystem

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 435 830 6294; fax: +1 919 515 3439.
E-mail address: jordan_smith@ncsu.edu (J.W. Smith).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.05.007
0959-3780/ß 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

services, etc.). Similar to the ﬁeld’s theoretical innovation, the
methods and metrics proposed and utilized by soundscape
ecologists differed dramatically from the use of traditional ecological indicators, such as population counts for key species.
The theories and methodologies employed by soundscape
ecologists have expanded greatly over the past several years with
improvements to recording hardware, processing software and
statistical models (Pijanowski et al., 2011b). However, to date, the
vast majority of soundscape ecology research has been conducted
by natural scientists and has remained focused on quantifying how
the acoustic dynamics of a place, such as the presence/absence and
amplitude of anthropogenic noise, affect non-human biota (e.g.,
Kuehne et al., 2013; Proppe et al., 2013; Tucker et al., 2014). While
this research is essential to advancing our knowledge of
bioacoutics, a more comprehensive understanding of soundscape
ecology can be built through alternative perspectives offered by
other ﬁelds including spatial ecology, psychology and the
humanities (Pijanowski et al., 2011a). For example, spatial ecology
can provide insight as to how geophysical spatial patterns such
as topography and vegetation inﬂuence the composition and
dynamics of a location’s soundscape (e.g., Pekin et al., 2012).

64

J.W. Smith, B.C. Pijanowski / Global Environmental Change 28 (2014) 63–74

Fig. 1. The human and policy dimensions of soundscape ecology framework.

Similarly, psychology can be employed to better understand how
humans perceive and respond to a place’s aural dimensions (e.g.,
Guastavino and Katz, 2004).
Recognizing the need for more integrative approaches to
soundscape ecology, Pijanowski and his colleagues (2011a)
developed a model in which soundscapes were conceptualized
as the product of coupled natural and human systems (Fig. 1). The
intent was to provide an organizing framework for understanding
the factors shaping the characteristics and dynamics of soundscapes. The framework is grounded in the principles of land change
science, which acknowledge that landscapes are temporally and
spatially variable systems perturbed by both natural and
anthropogenic drivers (Turner et al., 2007). Collectively, these
driving factors shape the composition and dynamics of a speciﬁc
geographic locations’ acoustic environment. For example, atmospheric processes such as rain, thunder and wind movement
interact with the biogeophysical properties of a landscape
(topography, land cover, etc.) to produce sounds that vary across
time and space. The properties and dynamics of soundscapes, in
turn, feedback into and shape both natural and human systems. For
example, the acoustic characteristics of a landscape can have a
signiﬁcant effect on animal species’ ability to perceive biologically
important sounds (e.g., mating calls) and consequently affect their
own vocalization patterns (Barber et al., 2010; Laiolo, 2010).
Similarly, humans are also functionally connected to the acoustic
characteristics of landscapes. Psychological attachments are
formed to speciﬁc places because, in part, the sounds heard in
those places contribute to unique and memorable experiences
(Morgan, 2010; Ryden, 1993). Indeed, soundscapes are creations of
both natural and human systems, but they also have important, but
often poorly understood, feedbacks into these systems (Pijanowski
et al., 2011a).
Pijanowski and his colleagues emphasized their framework was
not exhaustive, noting each component of the framework
(atmospheric processes, biogeophysical properties, human systems and the built environment) were in and of themselves
complex systems with many research questions yet to be explored.
The role of sound within each of these systems has been examined
to varying degrees. Our understanding of the interactions between
sound and biogeophysical processes continues to grow rapidly
(Fletcher, 2007). However, research focused on the interaction
between sound and human systems remains fragmented among

different disciplines, each of which utilizes its own epistemologies,
theories and methodologies (Dumyahn and Pijanowski, 2011a,b;
Farina, 2014b).
The objectives of this paper are threefold: First, to present an
integrative human and policy dimensions of soundscape ecology
framework that provides the logic and structure upon which an
interdisciplinary body of scholarship can be built in the future.
Second, to review the literature from four distinct disciplines –
health, psychology, economics and anthropology – that have either
directly or indirectly investigated how soundscapes affect human
psychology, behavior or governance systems. Throughout our
review, we highlight unexplored avenues for future research. By
distilling large and often disparate bodies of the literature and
previous ﬁndings, the integrative framework and disciplinary
reviews allow us to achieve our third objective of developing
focused and scientiﬁcally informed soundscape policy and
management recommendations.
2. Soundscapes and soundscape ecology: a brief introduction to
deﬁnitions and concepts
Because the breadth of soundscape research is so broad, being
explored independently by different disciplines, there are numerous ways to deﬁne what a soundscape is. Most deﬁnitions agree on
two points: First, the term refers to the totality of a sonic
environment and second, that the aggregate composition of
sounds is tied to a speciﬁc place. The Oxford dictionary is most
succinct on these two points, deﬁning a soundscape as ‘‘the sounds
heard in a particular location, considered as a whole.’’ Similarities
are apparent in soundscape management policies, such as those
that exist in the UK which describe soundscapes as ‘‘the totality of
all sounds within a location with an emphasis on the relationship
between [an] individual’s or society’s perception of, understanding
of, and interaction with the sonic environment’’ (2009, p. 7). More
recent conceptualizations have expanded upon the anthropocentric focus of these deﬁnitions to encompass non-human ecological
processes as well. Speciﬁcally, Pijanowski et al. (2011b) deﬁne the
term as all sounds – those produced from human activity, those
created by biological sources and those generated as a result of
geophysical processes – emanating from a given landscape.
Building upon early work within the ﬁeld of soundscape ecology
(e.g., Krause, 1987; Schafer, 1977; Truax, 1999), Pijanowski and his

J.W. Smith, B.C. Pijanowski / Global Environmental Change 28 (2014) 63–74

colleagues suggest that all soundscapes are comprised of three
components: (1) anthrophony, the sounds deriving from individual
human activities and the built environment; (2) biophony, the
sounds originating from biological organisms; and (3) geophony,
naturally occurring geophysical sounds (e.g., rain, wind, etc.). Each
of these three compositional inputs varies across time and space,
interact with one another and result in dynamic soundscapes
within a speciﬁc geographical setting.
We adopt the deﬁnition of a soundscape as the perception of all
sounds – those produced from human activity, those created by
biological sources and those generated as a result of geophysical
processes – emanating from a given landscape. This deﬁnition is
consistent with the recently developed International Standard ISO/
FDIS 12913-1, which distinguishes between an acoustic environment, comprised solely of the physical presence of sound itself, and
soundscapes, which involve both sound and human perception
(International Standards Organization, 2013). A deﬁnition that
acknowledges both the natural and human components of a
soundscape is essential for effective cross-disciplinary communication (Brown et al., 2011).
3. An integrative framework of the human and policy
dimensions of soundscape ecology
The human and policy dimensions of soundscape ecology
framework details only one sub-component of the coupled natural
and human systems model developed by Pijanowski and his
colleagues (Fig. 1; 2011a). The coupled natural and human systems
model, which has been foundational in the formation and growth
of soundscape ecology (Farina, 2014a), is built upon the idea that
continuous human interaction with the natural environment has
resulted in complex organizational, spatial and temporal coupled
systems (Liu et al., 2007). We begin by presenting the framework
and describing its individual components and how they draw upon
a variety of different disciplines. Subsequently, we present the
detailed discipline-speciﬁc reviews that were utilized to construct
the framework. We conclude with speciﬁc policy and management
guidelines that can be derived form the framework and the
research from which it was constructed.
First, the acoustic properties of soundscapes enter the human
system at the individual level through auditory processing (Fig. 1,
Label 1; Werner, 2012). Individuals reconstruct scenes based upon
their ability to identify distinct auditory objects, such as frog calls
or motor vehicles (Litovsky, 2012). Meaning is ascribed to auditory
objects based upon what Russell dubbed ‘affective quality’ (e.g.,
pleasant/disturbing, relaxing/alarming) (Russell, 2003). Once
individuals ascribe meaning to auditory objects, they incorporate
assessments of the landscape’s esthetic properties and subsequently form an integrative assessment of the visual and auditory
environment (Lewis et al., 2012). The psychological process of
ascribing meaning to certain sounds leads to basic physiological
responses, such as changes in blood pressure levels and hormone
levels related to anxiety (Label 2). This causal chain between
psychological and physiological process follows the allostasis
theory, which suggests the brain anticipates environmental stimuli
and prepares the body for action (McEwen, 2000). Rapid
physiological responses can eventually lead to long-term undesirable health outcomes such as reduced cognitive processing
abilities and an increased probability of experiencing a heart
attack (McEwen and Seeman, 1999).
Continuing with the psychological responses to sound (Label 3),
‘‘the perception of the soundscape is inherently personal and
affected by what listeners, each with [their own] unique sets of
experiences and preferences, brings to the listening situation’’
(Jennings and Cain, 2013, p. 295). Past research suggests
individuals prefer landscapes based upon both the evolutionary

65

advantages they provide as well as their ability to meet cognitive,
behavioral and emotional needs. Positive meanings and preferences are given to landscapes that are non-threatening, an
evolutionarily deﬁned predisposition shown to be consistent
across cultures (Kaplan and Kaplan, 1989; Falk and Balling, 2010).
The question of whether evolutionarily deﬁned landscape preferences are partially driven by soundscape characteristics and
dynamics, however, remains to be explored. Evidence is available
that suggests individuals prefer landscapes and soundscapes that
meet cognitive needs (e.g., the need to maintain a personal sense of
identity that is tied to a speciﬁc geographic space or speciﬁc
sounds), behavioral needs (e.g., the need to hear certain sounds to
engage in speciﬁc behaviors) and emotional needs and desires (e.g.,
the desire to experience solitude in quiet locations) (e.g., Bradley
and Lang, 2000; Hvenegaard, 2002; Stewart, 1992).
Preferences and values toward speciﬁc auditory objects are
believed to drive personal behaviors (Label 4; Stern, 2000). For
example, if an individual values birdsong because it allows them to
test their skills as a bird watcher, they are more likely to travel
further to reach areas rich in certain avian sounds (Ruddell and
Gramann, 1994). Similarly, individuals who value a home
environment where they cannot hear trafﬁc will be more likely
to pay more for a home in a quiet neighborhood. The connection
between sound and individual economic decisions, when extrapolated to entire populations, implies that certain sounds can, and
actually do, have signiﬁcant impacts on large economic systems
such regional housing markets.
Valuing certain soundscapes or individual sounds may, over
time, lead to relatively enduring psychological attachments to
those soundscapes or sounds (Label 5). An empirical linkage
between acoustic preferences and the establishment of an
enduring sense of place has yet to be fully explored. Existing
tangential evidence suggests sound is a key factor shaping the
formation of individuals’ self-identity. For example, certain types
of recreationists such as birdwatchers and backcountry hikers
develop unique personal identities because of their ability to
experience speciﬁc types of sounds or soundscapes in recreational
areas (Hvenegaard, 2002; Scott et al., 2005).
The relationship between soundscapes and human psychology
is not just manifested through the behaviors of individuals. Rather,
it is relatively enduring and can play a fundamental role in how
groups, and even entire cultures, develop (Label 6; Morgan, 2010;
Samuels et al., 2010). The values individuals ascribe to landscapes
and their acoustic characteristics are known to be socially
constructed by groups and societies as their cultures continue to
adapt and evolve (Blackmore, 2000; Richerson and Boyd, 2004).
The ascription of particular meanings to local sounds can shape
group identity formation; a prime example of this is the welldocumented songscapes of Native American tribes in the
southwestern US (Ferguson et al., 2009). These Native American
songscapes are culturally meaningful songs using lyrics describing
speciﬁc geographic locations and the seasonal migration patterns
of individual tribes. Individual psychological processes and the
social contexts in which they occur are codependent and evolve
together over time (Richerson and Boyd, 2004).
Socially deﬁned values toward soundscapes and speciﬁc sounds
are formalized and legitimized through public policy and
management systems (Label 7). Public policy and management
issues related to soundscapes remain largely underexplored
(Weber, 2013). Most commonly, public policies focus on noise
sources such as heavily used highways and airports, which pose a
clear public nuisance. Acoustic environments are reduced to a
fundamental unit, typically sound pressure levels, which can be
easily measured and enforced.
The ﬁnal stage of sound’s movement through the human
system involves individual (Label 8) and collective behaviors

66

J.W. Smith, B.C. Pijanowski / Global Environmental Change 28 (2014) 63–74

(Label 9) that shape the acoustic properties of a particular
soundscape (Label 9). It is at this juncture that the coupled system
reaches closure and the dynamics of acoustic feedback properties
become drivers of soundscape change.
Collectively, the human and policy dimensions of soundscapes
are vast and have been tangentially touched upon by a wide variety
of disciplines ranging from neurobiology to anthropology and
social psychology. These diverse disciplines offer complimentary
bodies of evidence for how human systems are affected by the
acoustic properties of their environments. In the sections to follow,
we present four detailed discipline-speciﬁc reviews that were
utilized to construct the framework. The speciﬁc disciplines
covered – health, psychology, economics and anthropology –
were selected because each has a substantial body of theory and
empirical evidence related to human–soundscape interactions.
Future reviews from other ﬁelds can incorporate their disciplinespeciﬁc knowledge into the human and policy dimensions of
soundscape ecology framework and create a more integrative body
of knowledge dedicated to understanding the dynamic human
dimensions of soundscapes.
In each of the four reviews below we point out disciplinary
research needs that, if addressed, would lead to a more integrated
understanding of the human and policy dimensions of soundscape
ecology. We conclude with a detailed review of current soundscape-related policies and regulations. We describe how existing
governance mechanisms are inadequate and ill-suited to successfully conserve the diminishing availability of natural soundscapes
on a global scale.
3.1. Individual and public health
3.1.1. Existing knowledge
Soundscapes affect human health in a variety of ways (Fig. 1,
Label 2). Known effects are multi-phasic, ﬁrst involving short-term
physiological responses to certain sounds. Short-term responses
are mediated by the autonomic nervous system and include
changes in blood pressure, heart rate, depth and rate of respiration,
pupil size, skin conductance levels, muscle tension, endocrine
outputs and vascular constriction (Stansfeld, 1992). Undesirable
physiological activations, most notably increases in heart rate,
blood pressure and vasoconstriction, contribute to numerous longterm health impacts that are wide-ranging and highly variable in
severity. Known effects range from subjective appraisals of
annoyance (Miedema and Oudshoorn, 2001; Miedema, 2007) to
sleep deprivation (Muzet, 2007), cognitive impairment (Stansfeld
et al., 2005), heart disease (Babisch, 2008) and of course hearing
loss (Burns, 1973; Kryter, 1985). The majority of previous research
on human health impacts of sound has focused on speciﬁc noise
sources and environments such as airports, highways and
industrial worksites, which pose especially high exposure risks.
Despite the highly variable nature of noise sources and their health
consequences, nearly all previous research has been framed within
a simple dose–response model whereby exposure to sounds at
increasingly unpleasant amplitudes and over increasingly extended periods of time leads to progressively severe health impacts
(Sharp, 2010).
Several review papers provide detailed accounts of previous
research focused on the human health impacts of noise (Moudon,
2009; Stansfeld and Matheson, 2003; Stansfeld et al., 2000a,
2000b). Collectively there is little evidence for adverse health
outcomes at exposures less than 30 dB(A). Modest adverse effects
begin to emerge around 40 dB(A) where large proportions of
subjects in clinical studies and ﬁeld-based experiments report high
levels of annoyance (Miedema, 2007). At levels between 40 dB(A)
and 55 dB(A), sustained concentration and memory are impaired
(Stansfeld et al., 2005). The most severe health impacts have been

found in repeated exposure to sounds over 55 dB(A). For example,
Van Kempen et al. (2002) found the risk of ischemic heart disease
increased by 1.09% for every 5 dB(A) increase in daytime noise
exposure between 50 and 70 dB(A). To put this risk in context,
Babisch (2008) conducted a meta-analysis of 61 noise exposure
studies and concluded that daytime exposure levels rarely drop
below 50 dB(A) in urban areas. Prolonged exposure to noise above
75 dB, typically experienced by individuals living adjacent to
highways and airports, is linked to increasingly severe cardiovascular risks such as higher probabilities of suffering a myocardial
infarction (Babisch, 2008). At sound pressure levels above 130(dB),
individuals experience acute pain and hearing loss.
3.1.2. Current and future research needs
There are numerous pressing research needs in the area of
sound exposure and human health responses as evidenced by
entire academic journals and conferences being devoted to the
subject. Here, we focus in on the broad research needs that will
become increasingly important given global environmental and
social changes such as rapid rates of urbanization.
First, existing knowledge of the human health impacts from
noise have been established through rigorous laboratory experiments (Stansfeld et al., 2000a). Now there is a need for established
ﬁndings to be translated into epidemiological terms measuring
population-wide effects (Miedema, 2007; Moudon, 2009). Exposure to unwanted sounds will become an increasingly endemic
public health issue as the population densities of urban areas
continue to increase. Translating known decrements to human
health from established dose–response relationships to population-wide projections of impacts and their associated costs has the
potential to increase the willingness of elected ofﬁcials and public
health professionals to make soundscape management polices a
higher priority. While the World Health Organization has made
valuable progress in this area in Europe (World Health Organization, 2011), coordinated and international epidemiological studies
would undoubtedly raise the awareness of soundscapes and their
impact on human health. Conﬂict over noise mitigation policy in
the Netherlands is evidence of members of the general public
realizing the negative consequences of noise and advocating for
polices that promote quieter and healthier communities. During
the 2012 legislative session, citizens, local governmental bodies
and politicians formed advocacy coalitions alongside public health
institutes and non-governmental organizations and successfully
lobbied for the parliament to revise pending legislation to include
mandatory monitoring and measurement of sound pressure levels
near highways (Ministry of Infrastructure and Environment, 2011;
Weber, 2013).
Second, a dedicated line of inquiry is needed to understand how
desirable soundscape characteristics impact health outcomes.
Nearly all previous noise and health studies have adopted a dose–
response relationship where unwanted anthropogenic sounds are
the primary independent variable of interest. Very little, if any,
research has applied the dose–response model to examine the
other two components that deﬁne a soundscape – geophony and
biophony. Recent epidemiological research has established that
the availability of parks, greenways and open spaces lead to
improved public health outcomes (Sallis et al., 2012). Future
research should attempt to disaggregate the characteristics and
attributes of more natural landscapes and their effects on human
health. The hypotheses that exposure to sound from geophysical
and biological sources is related to positive human health
responses warrants future exploration. These propositions would
beneﬁt from a careful examination through controlled laboratory
experiments, ﬁeld-based case studies and analysis of secondary
data. Inverting the dose–response model to examine potentially
beneﬁcial responses to geophysical and biological sounds may also

J.W. Smith, B.C. Pijanowski / Global Environmental Change 28 (2014) 63–74

yield valuable and broader insights for urban and landscape
planning processes and polices. Documented evidence for human
health beneﬁts associated with experiencing natural sounds would
increase the impetus to maintain or improve the biological
diversity and ecological integrity of natural areas threatened with
continued fragmentation.
While the beneﬁts of future research into the intersection
between soundscapes and human health are wide ranging, there
will still be considerable barriers in translating scientiﬁc ﬁndings
into policy change. Environmental policies in general, suffer from
decisions being made out of the need to avoid overt and welldocumented threats to human health and safety as opposed to the
need to improve human well being (Braybrooke and Lindblom,
1963). There is growing interest among landscape and environmental planners to develop novel methods of documenting the
positive health beneﬁts of pleasing and desirable soundscapes. For
example, Jennings and Cain (2013) recently proposed a novel
framework for gauging the objective qualities of urban soundscapes (i.e., composition and sound pressure levels), identifying the
factors affecting whether these might be perceived as positive and
developing speciﬁc strategies for conveying those positive aspects
to diverse sets of individuals such as urban planners. The
translation of soundscape science into policy change will
undoubtedly require more creative work along these lines.
3.2. Psychology: evolutionary deﬁned preferences
3.2.1. Existing knowledge
Humans ascribe meaning to natural landscapes and their
sounds (Fig. 1, Label 3). The ascription of these meanings can be
either implicit and unconscious or explicit and socially constructed. Implicit and unconscious meanings, those that appear to
be most directly related to human nature, are biologically
determined and have principally been examined within the ﬁeld
of evolutionary psychology. The basic thesis is that cognitive
functioning is a product of natural selection. Ancestral humans
more capable of seeking out safe locations within a landscape were
more likely to pass on their genes to subsequent generations.
Consequently, modern humans are genetically hard-wired to
prefer natural landscapes and soundscapes that minimize physical
risks.
Historical as well as cross-cultural evidence supports the theory
that landscape preferences are biologically determined. Appleton
(1975) draws upon historical evidence such as landscape paintings
from diverse origins to suggest humans have a natural afﬁnity
toward savannah-like landscapes (i.e., large open spaces deﬁned
by low shrubs and edges deﬁned by taller trees). These landscapes
are believed to provide individuals with both the opportunity to
detect potential hazards as well as places to hide and escape.
Kaplan and Kaplan (1989) suggest preferences for landscapes
offering both prospect and refuge makes sense when described in
terms of evolutionary psychology because these types of landscapes minimize risks associated with acquiring information and
resources (e.g., food and prey). Recent empirical work across a
diversity of cultural contexts such as Africa (Falk and Balling,
2010), Asia (Orians and Heerwagen, 1992; Orians, 1980), Europe
(Garcı́a-Llorente et al., 2012; Tempesta, 2010) and North America
(Balling and Falk, 1982) supports the theory that landscape
preferences are biologically determined.
3.2.2. Current and future research needs
The literature on the evolutionary psychology of landscape
preferences implicitly suggests the seemingly universal ‘‘human
nature’’ of landscape choice is deﬁned by how we take in, and
cognitively process information visually (Kaplan, 1992). The
biological underpinnings of soundscapes remain unexplored

67

(Wallin et al., 2000). A logical extension of the evolutionary
psychology thesis would be to suggest savanna-like landscapes
also offer acoustic advantages over other landscape types such as
rain forests, coniferous forests, deciduous forests and deserts.
Dense forested landscapes dampen sounds, making it difﬁcult to
discern sounds associated with known threats. Conversely, the
acoustic properties of deserts allow sound to travel easily across
the landscape, resulting in increased exposure and risk. Only
savannah-type landscapes offer the acoustic characteristics
whereby potential prey located in the open can be detected more
easily, not only visibly, but also sonically. Simultaneously, acoustic
exposure risks are mitigated through the ability to quietly hide in
the taller vegetation located along the edges of the open space. The
evolutionary development of human psychological preferences is
likely to have arisen not only out of our visual perception of natural
landscapes, but through our cognitive auditory processing as well.
3.3. Human psychology: socially deﬁned preferences
3.3.1. Existing knowledge
The previous section does not imply landscape and soundscape
preferences are solely the product of human sociobiology, a large
body of literature from the ﬁeld of environmental psychology
reveals a great degree of preference heterogeneity within
individual populations. These theoretical perspectives are not
contradictory. As the eminent sociobiologist E.O. Wilson notes,
‘‘particularities in decision making distinguish one human being
from another. But the rules followed [in decision making] are tight
enough to produce a broad overlap in the decisions taken by all
individuals and hence [yield] a convergence powerful enough to be
labeled human nature’’ (2004, p. 67). The ﬁeld most capable of
understanding preference heterogeneity within individual populations is environmental psychology.
A variety of concepts such as place attachment (Tuan, 1974),
sense of place (Jorgensen and Stedman, 2001) and place meanings
(Smith et al., 2011) have been utilized and reﬁned through
psychometric research, to gain a ﬁnely tuned understanding of
why and how individuals become psychologically attached to
various landscapes. Psychological connections to particular natural
landscapes arise because those landscapes serve distinct cognitive,
behavioral and emotional needs.
3.3.1.1. Cognitive and behavioral needs. Cognitive needs refer to the
ability of natural landscapes to shape individuals’ personal
identities (Proshansky et al., 1983). Self identity, individuals’
personal appraisals of who they are in reference to others, is
believed to be the product of both social relationships (Breakwell,
1992) and relationships to speciﬁc geographic spaces (Ittelson
et al., 1976). Recent research also suggests natural landscapes play
a functional cognitive role in shaping larger social identities, such
as those individuals ascribe to their family and their community
(Davenport and Anderson, 2005; Smith et al., 2011). Empirical
research within this area has primarily focused on understanding
how individuals’ place identity shapes their preferences for how
natural landscapes are managed. This line of research has yet to
disaggregate the acoustic and non-acoustic properties leading to
individuals becoming attached to certain natural landscapes.
Tangential evidence suggests natural sounds are key factors
shaping individuals’ ability to identify with speciﬁc geographic
locations. Certain types of recreationists, such as birdwatchers and
backcountry hikers, develop unique personal identities because of
their ability to experience speciﬁc types of sounds or soundscapes.
For birdwatchers, the ability to identify certain species solely by
their calls is a key indicator of skill and commitment to the activity
(Hvenegaard, 2002; Scott et al., 2005). Similarly, a frequently noted
motivation for engaging in back country hiking is the ability to

68

J.W. Smith, B.C. Pijanowski / Global Environmental Change 28 (2014) 63–74

‘‘escape the sounds of everyday life’’ (Stewart, 1992). Social norms
and identities among certain recreational groups such as
snowmobilers, off-highway vehicle users and cross country skiers,
are also heavily dependent upon the ability to experience distinct
soundscapes (Ruddell and Gramann, 1994).
3.3.1.2. Emotional needs. The acoustic characteristics of natural
landscapes also feedback to human psychology through emotional
as opposed to cognitive and behavioral channels. The majority of
previous research on emotional responses to sound has focused on
music (Juslin and Slodoba, 2001). Research on emotional responses
to music is driven by obvious applications to ﬁlm (Cohen, 2001),
marketing (Bruner, 1990) and therapy (Bunt and Hoskyns, 2002).
The research on emotional responses to music suggest various
emotive states such as sadness, fear and happiness arise out of
several distinct mechanisms including brain stem reﬂexes,
evaluative conditioning, emotional cognition, visual imagery,
episodic memory and musical expectancy (Juslin and Västfjäll,
2008). Each of these mechanisms corresponds to a distinct way
that music induces different emotions. For example, brain stem
reﬂex refers to the process whereby distinct acoustic characteristics signal an important or urgent event. Loud, dissonant and fast
temporal patterns tend to stimulate arousal and feelings of
unpleasantness in listeners (Burt et al., 1995). There is a distinct
need to understand how these mechanisms operate in the
formation of emotional responses to non-musical stimuli.
Past research on emotional responses to non-musical stimuli
has been limited in both quantity and theoretical consistency (De
Coensel and Botteldooren, 2006). Early studies utilized semantic
differential scales to elicit responses from individuals regarding
the extent to which different soundscape recordings were either
pleasurable and soothing or annoying and stressful (Bjork, 1985;
Gabrielsson and Sjögren, 1979; Kerrick et al., 1969). This research
was limited in that it was not capable of eliciting responses to
speciﬁc acoustic characteristics or sounds within a soundscape
recording; it was also limited in the range of emotional responses
elicited (typically, only the pleasant/annoying gradient was used).
Subsequent research has focused on a broader range of emotional
responses such as variations in the ability of soundscapes to evoke
soothing or stressful emotional responses (Berglund and Nilsson,
2006; Berglund et al., 2001; Cain et al., 2013; Kawai et al., 2004;
Raimbault et al., 2003; Västfjäll et al., 2003; Viollon and Lavandier,
2000). However, this research was still focused on assessing
emotional responses to whole soundscape recordings. Only
recently have researchers in the ﬁeld of psychoacoustics begun
to disaggregate emotional responses to either speciﬁc acoustic
characteristics such as frequency (pitch), amplitude (volume) and
sound pressure, or distinct types of sounds that originate from
human, biological or geophysical sources. The majority of recent
research on emotional responses to acoustic characteristics or
distinct sounds suggests anthropogenic sounds elicit more
annoying and stressful emotions than either biological or
geophysical sounds (Axelsson et al., 2010; Dubois et al., 2006;
Gustavino, 2006; Nilsson and Berglund, 2006; Viollon and
Lavandier, 2000). This only holds true, however, for anthropogenic
sounds that could be classiﬁed as ‘technological’ (e.g., trafﬁc).
Emotional response to anthropogenic sounds caused by humans
themselves can yield both positive (e.g., babies’ coos and laughing)
and negative (e.g., crying and yelling) affective reactions (Bradley
and Lang, 2000)
3.3.2. Current and future research needs
Research on emotional responses to soundscapes and speciﬁc
sounds needs to be expanded in empirical scope. Nearly all
previous research has been conducted within the context of
industrial sites (e.g., Nilsson, 2007; Västfjäll et al., 2003) or urban

areas whose soundscapes tend to be dominated by technological
anthropogenic sounds. Research focused on undeveloped areas
such as remote areas within natural parks is needed. More
empirical focus on the soundscapes in these areas would yield
insight into the complex linkages between human psychology and
environmental stimuli. A more ﬁnely tuned understanding of the
extent to which speciﬁc and distinct sounds inﬂuence human
emotions could also provide insight into how to plan for and design
socially desirable and emotionally positive built environments
(Jennings and Cain, 2013)
3.4. Economics
3.4.1. Existing knowledge
The ﬁeld of economics has undoubtedly conducted the most
empirical research on how sound impacts human systems. For
economists, sound, or more speciﬁcally unwanted noise, is an
uncompensated external cost affecting individual and market
behavior. Noise is a byproduct of either production or consumption
activities that adversely affects third parties not directly involved
in the transaction (Nelson, 2008). The fundamental role of
econometric reasearch has been attempting to generate valid
estimates of the uncompensated external costs associated with
unwanted sounds. Ideally, the information from valuation studies
can inform cost-effective policy design, including choices between
different policy options such as regulations, noise pollution taxes
and tradable permits.
Valuation of uncompensated external costs is inherently
difﬁcult because of the lack of an explicit market for soundscape
quality. Outdoor acoustic space is a common-pool resource where
there is little or no allocation of use rights for individuals or
organizations (Cheung, 1987; Dumyahn and Pijanowski, 2011a).
As a result, the valuation of sound has to be accomplished through
non-market valuation techniques that can either be classiﬁed as
revealed preference or stated preference methods.
In revealed preference studies, sound quality is assumed to be a
complimentary good consumed in a private market. These markets
are almost exclusively urban housing markets whose stock of
goods (houses) varies in exposure to unwanted sounds (e.g., airport
noise, trafﬁc, etc.). The economist must acquire detailed data on
housing market transactions with careful consideration to capture
all of the potentially relevant variables known to affect market
prices (e.g., structural, accessibility and environmental characteristics aside from sound quality). Long-term average sound
exposure measurements must also be compiled across the study
area. Regression analyses can subsequently be utilized to unbundle
prices and calculate the implicit price for exposure to different
sounds and different sound levels. Numerous studies have
employed the revealed preference method on housing markets;
their results and nuances are reviewed in more detail elsewhere
(Nelson, 2008). The overwhelming majority of previous studies
have focused on noise from airports, high-trafﬁc roads and to a
lesser extent, railways. A meta-analysis of 40 revealed preference
studies of housing markets which included a metric for airport
noise found the price of residential properties declined by between
0.50% and 0.70% per dB(A) (Nelson, 2004). Similar meta-analyses of
revealed preference studies focused on trafﬁc noise have found
comparable detrimental effects on housing prices. Nelson (1982)
reviewed nine empirical studies covering 14 different housing
markets in North American and found properties declined in value
by an average of 0.40% per dB(A). A more recent meta-analysis
comparing 16 estimates from nine different revealed preference
studies determined residential property values declined by an
average of 0.64% per dB(A) (Bertrand, 1997).
While revealed preference methods offer a large degree of
validity, they are poorly suited to examine the feasibility or social

J.W. Smith, B.C. Pijanowski / Global Environmental Change 28 (2014) 63–74

acceptability of different policy solutions. As a result, economists
have increasingly utilized stated preference methods to value
sound. In stated preference studies, the researcher constructs a
simulated market for an environmental resource. Research
subjects, who are often random samples of the general public,
are then solicited to state their willingness to pay for that resource.
Experimental manipulation, such as removing certain sounds or
altering amplitude levels, allows the analyst a high degree of
ﬂexibility in attaining willingness to pay values. Additionally, the
researcher has explicit control over the payment mechanism, such
as altering existing tax rates or creating a hypothetical market of
tradable noise pollution permits (Carson and Hanemann, 2005).
Relative to revealed preference methods utilizing market transaction data, stated preference studies allow the analyst to isolate the
monetary values ascribed to anthropogenic noise; imperfections in
real markets are avoided. Navrud (2002), in his review of studies
using stated preference methods to value sound, concludes the
primary beneﬁt of stated preference studies is their ability to
explore non-existent sound management policies.
3.4.2. Current and future research needs
The methodological capabilities that economists can bring to
bear on soundscape research are potentially very powerful.
Revealed preference methodologies enable economists to unbundle real market transactions and parse out the costs associated
with unwanted sounds. Currently, the frontier of this research
entails leveraging the capabilities of geographic information
systems and the additional nuanced parameters they can generate
to develop more spatially explicit and empirically robust valuation
estimates (e.g., Salvi, 2007; Theebe, 2004; Cohen and Coughlin,
2008). The utilization of geographic information systems in
econometric modeling has enabled a better accounting of the
spatial heterogeneity that has proved problematic for revealed
preference studies in the past. Nelson (2008) provides a thorough
review of current and future research that is beyond the scope of
this paper.
It is evident, based upon a large number of empirical studies,
that the presence and amplitude of anthropogenic noise negatively
affects housing values (and consequently tax revenues and the
ability to provide public services). Interestingly, a recent revealed
preference study of housing market transactions also showed
home sales prices were higher in neighborhoods with higher levels
of biological diversity in local bird populations (Farmer et al.,
2013). What remains to be examined is whether or not
anthropogenic noises have a compound detrimental effect on real
estate markets by impacting the presence of wildlife populations.
Future studies utilizing housing price data, average sound pressure
(exposure) levels and wildlife population data would provide
unique insights into how human systems (real estate markets) and
natural systems (bird species diversity) are simultaneously
impacted by the characteristics of their soundscapes. Even further
insight could be gained if investigators were capable of disaggregating sound pressure (exposure) measurements by sound
source. If this were possible, the investigators could estimate
marginal willingness to pay (avoid) anthropogenic, biological and
geophysical sounds.
Research on the economic dimensions of soundscapes can also
be advanced through an expanded use of stated preference
methodologies (choice experiments, contingent valuation and
conjoint analyses) given their advantages in exploring the social
acceptability of potential policy and management mechanisms.
Two needs are paramount: First, a concentrated effort is needed to
explore alternative and hypothetical soundscape management
policies. Past studies using the stated preference method to value
sound have not always placed a strong emphasis on shaping policy,
focusing instead on deriving valid willingness to pay estimates. An

69

example of this is asking individuals to value hypothetical houses
which vary in their exposure to unwanted sounds (Arsenio et al.,
2006; Wardman and Bristow, 2004). A variety of payment
mechanisms for the policies described latter in this paper need to
be explored. In built and more natural environments, multiple
options such as variable property tax rates and the issuance of public
bonds warrant exploration. Similarly, in terms of industrial noise
polluters, stated preference methods could be used to explore the
possibility of ﬁnancing noise mitigation via tradable permit systems.
Without a clear and empirically grounded understanding of how
different soundscape management policies can be ﬁnanced, there
is little hope for either implementing or sustaining them.
A second frontier for stated preference research is to move
beyond traditional data collection methodologies, which are
almost solely mail- or web-based surveys and questionnaires.
This method of data collection requires stated preference studies to
value hypothetical percentage reductions in noise levels (e.g., a
50% reduction in current levels). It is unknown whether
respondents can accurately estimate how a sound differs when
it is experienced at 60 dB(A) as opposed to 30 dB(A) (Baranzini
et al., 2010a,b). Ongoing advances in this area involve conducting
stated preference experiments in a laboratory setting equipped
with virtual immersion systems. The use of immersive virtual
environments enables the researcher to have full control over a
manipulated environmental setting which holds the potential to
yield more valid willingness-to-pay estimates (Loomis and
Blascovich, 1999). Leveraging these new capabilities will also
allow researchers to parse out explicit values for individual noise
sources. Navrud (2002) notes one of the main limitations for the
stated preference method’s ability to inform policy is the inability
to know exactly what sounds individuals consider (e.g., trafﬁc,
human communication, sirens, etc.) when responding to a mail- or
web-based survey. The use of immersive virtual environments
solves this problem by allowing direct experimental control over
the source, amplitude and duration of exposure to individual
sounds (Durlach and Mavor, 1994).
3.5. Anthropology
Thus far, we have outlined the various ways in which sound
feeds back to human systems and directly inﬂuences individuals
through a variety of psychological and behavioral processes. The
inﬂuence of sound on individuals consequently shapes human
systems at larger social scales such as social interactions,
community organization and development and even the creation
of cultural or place-based identities (Fig. 1, Label 6). Sound
inﬂuences the human system across its coupled social scales.
At the broadest social scale, that of whole civilizations,
anthropologists have been most adept at engaging and understanding the role of soundscapes in societal development.
Culturally speciﬁc sounds such as tonal patterns in language
and distinct musical styles shape cultural development in
numerous complex ways such as enabling the creation of distinct
identities and meanings. However, only relatively recently have
anthropologists begun to examine how the acoustic characteristics
of language, music and song are shaped by the biological or
geophysical sounds found in a culture’s local environment and
subsequently utilized to create culturally distinct meanings and
identities (Feld and Brennies, 2004; Samuels et al., 2010). The ﬁrst
notable exploration of a distinct cultural soundscape came from
Turnbull (1961) and Turnbull and colleagues’ study of the Mbutu
pygmies who live in the Congo’s Ituri rainforest (1961; 1992)
which was followed shortly by Feld’s expansive study of the Kaluli,
a non-literate clan living in the rain forests of Papua New Guinea
(Feld, 1991, 1990). These early studies were both, uncoincidentally,
focused on cultures living within rainforests, where sound travels

70

J.W. Smith, B.C. Pijanowski / Global Environmental Change 28 (2014) 63–74

farther than one can see, consequently resulting in social patterns
of communication being more auditory. Similar subsequent
studies have continued to document distinct cultural soundscapes, including language, song and music, across a wider variety
of societies (Basso, 1985; Feld, 2000, 1996; Roseman, 1991;
Seeger, 1987). These early acoustic ethnographies have subsequently inspired more contemporary work focused on the cultural
meanings of soundscapes found in larger Western civilizations.
This research has predominantly focused on detailing how
globalization has resulted in a loss of local identities and
culture-speciﬁc ways of interacting with and shaping our
soundscapes (Bennett and Peterson, 2004; Hansen, 2006;
Hirschkind, 2006; Sakakeeny, 2010; Seeger, 2003; Wallach,
2008; White, 2008). In a time of rapid social, economic and
ecological change at a global scale, there is a need for further
research to document and critically examine the role that
sound plays in shaping distinct cultural identities and societal
meanings.
4. Soundscape policy and management
4.1. Existing soundscape policy and management
The characteristics deﬁning the composition of soundscapes are
directly and indirectly driven by public policies (Fig. 1, Label 7).
Most public policies to date have been focused on mitigating
speciﬁc sources of noise (almost exclusively transportation
infrastructure) and have attempted to establish anthropocentric
amplitude thresholds for built urban environments. Within the
United States for example, the Occupational Safety and Health Act
(1970), the Noise Control Act (1972) and the Quiet Communities
Act (1978) are all legislative acts establishing sound pressure level
thresholds. For example, the US Department of Housing and Urban
Development used these laws to mandate new construction not
result in daytime sound pressure levels above 75 dB (US
Department of Housing and Urban Development, 1979). However,
both the Occupational Safety and Health Act and the Noise Control
Act receive little, if any, congressional appropriations. Similar
federal or intergovernmental guidelines have also been established
outside the United States as well. The Swiss government adopted
the Federal Ordinance on Noise Protection in 1987, which requires
noise mitigation on public roads (OFEFP, 2002). Similar to US
policies, many of the mitigation measures required under the
Swiss ordinance are not initiated or completed due to a lack of
federal appropriations to cover their costs (OFS and OFEFP, 1997).
The ﬁrst and most notable intergovernmental guidelines were
created in the late 1990s when the World Health Organization
issued recommendations for desirable noise levels in built
environments (Berglund et al., 1999; WHO Regional Ofﬁce for
Europe, 2009). Shortly thereafter, the European Union adopted
standards for the monitoring of outdoor noise in urban areas
(2002). The EU policy, commonly known as the Environmental
Noise Directive, requires large European cities develop urban noise
maps. City governments are tasked with using the maps to establish
noise action plans that include long-term monitoring protocols.
Collectively, existing public policies suffer from being highly
focused on individual noise sources and being poorly incorporated
into other environmental and urban planning frameworks.
4.2. Shifting from source-focused policies to spatially deﬁned policies
A larger concerted effort is needed at local, regional, federal
and international levels to refocus noise abatement policies away
from monitoring and managing speciﬁc noise sources to
monitoring and managing soundscapes across large geographic
spaces such as metropolitan areas and urban centers. The purpose

of this shift is to expand the geographic scope of existing
regulatory capabilities. While the human health impacts of noise
are well documented, existing policies are only capable of
mitigating impacts in areas prone to high noise levels such as
airports, construction sites and highways. These areas only
comprise a fraction of the built landscape (Seto et al., 2007). If
monitoring and management protocols were inclusive of entire
population centers, the potential to identify and manage
undesirable soundscapes would be greatly expanded. Future
polices should aim to improve human health by providing and
maintaining non-detrimental soundscapes. Protocols for acoustic
monitoring across urban regions are already being implemented
in large European cities as required by the EU’s Environmental
Noise Directive. Some European cities, such as Dublin, Ireland,
have mapped noise across their metropolitan region, developing
acoustic action plans and have reﬂected on challenges faced
throughout the process so that other cities can be more efﬁcient in
their mapping and planning processes (King et al., 2011; Murphy
and King, 2011, 2010; Murphy et al., 2009). Policies similar to the
Environmental Noise Directive, where regulatory capacities are
enabled across large geographic spaces and not targeted at
speciﬁc noise sources, are needed in other regions of the world.
Progressive cities in developed countries with established, yet
ﬂagging, noise mitigation policies might be most receptive to
more holistic sound management policies (Moudon, 2009). Local
and regional governance structures would be well served to learn
from and potentially build-upon the Environmental Noise
Directive’s process of proactive acoustic monitoring; best practice
manuals are currently available (see European Commission
Working Group Assessment of Exposure to Noise 2006). In
addition to shifting existing policy from source management to
whole soundscape management, another fruitful avenue for
soundscape policy is to integrate sound management into existing
environmental and urban planning frameworks.
4.3. Integration into other environmental and urban planning
frameworks
There has been little effort among landscape and urban
planners to incorporate soundscape quality into existing environmental and urban planning frameworks despite numerous
avenues where integration can occur (Weber, 2013). Within the
United States, for example, all federal projects and authorizations
are required under the National Environmental Policy Act of 1970
(NEPA) to be evaluated for their potential environmental and
socio-economic impacts. Determining the extent of the affected
environment is left to the federal regulatory agency with statutory
responsibilities over the planning process. Most often, clearly
delineating the affected environment is relatively simple. For
example, the activities involved in a stream restoration project are
delimited by the stream and its riparian buffer areas. The
responsible agency has relatively little trouble in identifying
potential impacts within the affected environment. For projects
that have the potential to impact soundscape quality however,
quantifying impacts can be extremely difﬁcult. Estimating potential impacts requires access to, and familiarity with, accepted
sound-propagation models (e.g., the Federal Highway Administration Trafﬁc Noise Model). Most resource planners are not aware of
sound propagation models and how they can be utilized to
estimate impacts to natural and human systems. Consequently,
soundscape impacts are frequently not considered in NEPA
required evaluations (Wisdom, 2007). Environmental Impact
Assessments are required across Europe as well (The Commission
to the European Parliament and Council, 2011).
Environmental policy formulation and legitimization across
both the United States and Europe suffer from being driven by a

J.W. Smith, B.C. Pijanowski / Global Environmental Change 28 (2014) 63–74

need to document obvert negative impacts to the health of natural
and human systems (Braybrooke and Lindblom, 1963). Very little
policy is crafted and implemented out of a desire to improve human
quality of life or ecosystem health. Some resource management
agencies however, are beginning to make notable policy changes
motivated primarily by a desire to improve soundscape quality as
opposed to the need to avoid socially undesirable effects on natural
and human systems.
The leading resource management agency in this regard is the
US National Park Service, which explicitly calls for an evaluation of
soundscape impacts when they are delineating a project’s
potential affected environment (National Park Service, 2001).
The National Park Service also requires all park units with actual or
proposed commercial air tour operations to develop an ‘‘Air Tour
Management Plan’’ to mitigate the impacts of air tour operations
on wildlife and visitor experiences. Federal agencies in the US such
as the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the
Fish and Wildlife Service, which must adhere to the NEPA planning
process in their consideration of impacts to freshwater and marine
resources, have also begun to more explicitly consider impacts to
natural soundscapes (Richardson et al., 1995). Another avenue that
has been suggested is the incorporation of soundscape impacts
into projects requiring life cycle assessments, a technique designed
to gauge the environmental and socio-economic impacts of a
project over its entire lifespan (Cucurachi et al., 2012). Collectively
the incorporation of soundscape impacts into federal planning
processes, such as the preparation of environmental impact
statements or life cycle assessments, remains inconsistent across
agencies and even within agencies (Wisdom, 2007). More consistent
evaluations of soundscape impacts will be needed as the science of
soundscape ecology continues to grow and as the value of natural
soundscapes becomes more prominent in the public consciousness.
Aside from federal processes, there is also an opportunity and
need to incorporate soundscapes more directly into city, urban and
landscape level planning efforts (Adams et al., 2006). Most current
planning efforts at these scales rely heavily on managing visual
esthetics, with little attention given to managing acoustic
characteristics. One possible reason for this is the ease of conveying
visual imagery through modiﬁed maps, illustrations or renderings.
Relative to esthetic impacts, it is much more difﬁcult to capture
and convey what a future urban space or landscape will sound like.
The majority of current planning guidelines in developed countries
are spatially explicit, meaning they have planning and zoning
regulations which segregate urban space relative to appropriate
industrial uses or residential population densities. Spatially
explicit planning guidelines can easily be augmented to include
regulations for socially desirable soundscapes within urban areas.
Just as a metropolitan area is sub-divided by planning commissions in efforts to control where and to what extent development
occurs, delineations could be made for establishing and maintaining desirable soundscapes in certain locations. The development of urban noise maps and their subsequent action plans under
the Environmental Noise Directive in Europe, offer the most
promising opportunity for this coupling of existing spatial
planning regulations with new soundscape regulations. New
soundscape policies need not be created from whole cloth. Rather,
progressive city and landscape planners should seek out existing
policies, guidelines and regulations that could beneﬁt their areas
through additional attention to acoustic characteristics.
5. New frontiers in soundscape ecology: human and policy
dimensions
The ﬁeld of soundscape ecology can beneﬁt from science that
approaches soundscapes as a product of coupled natural and
human systems (Pijanowski et al., 2011a). The burgeoning ﬁeld has

71

been actively attempting to better understand how the acoustic
characteristics and dynamics are related to the structure and
functioning of natural systems. Ongoing work is focused on a
variety of areas such as attempting to understand the spatial and
temporal dynamics of sound across different scales and developing
a better understanding of the impact of soundscapes on wildlife
(Pijanowski et al., 2011b). Soundscape research focused wholly
within natural systems is vitally important. But in isolation, it will
not lead to sustainable management practices. Concomitant and
concentrated research efforts from the psychological, social,
behavioral, economic and policy sciences are also needed to
understand how human systems shape soundscapes and consequently how the characteristics of those soundscapes feedback
into and affect human systems.
To date there has been considerable research on the human and
policy dimensions of soundscapes. However, this previous
research has been scattered across a wide variety of disparate
ﬁelds, each working with its own purposes and objectives. One
objective of this review article has been to provide a conceptual
framework for the human and policy dimensions of soundscapes.
The human and policy dimensions of soundscape ecology framework
models how sound traverses various dimensions within human
systems, eventually leading to individual and collective behaviors
that drive the acoustic composition of built and natural environments. The framework, being the product of systems-oriented
thinking, can serve as a unifying model around which diverse
disciplines can situate their work and see how it integrates and
complements research from other ﬁelds. The intent is to extend the
frontiers within and across disciplinary boundaries by plotting out
current trajectories and intersecting points of focus. Through our
review of how soundscapes feedback to individual and public
health, psychological well-being, economic systems and cultural
identities, we have mapped out several of these disciplinary
frontiers. Undoubtedly there are a variety of others outside our
expertise that could yield additional insights into human
responses to soundscapes.
If engaged through rigorous empirical inquiry, these frontiers
will ultimately lead to a better understanding of the role that
soundscapes play in a time of abrupt and unprecedented
environmental change. There is growing concern that the
availability of ‘natural’ soundscapes is dwindling (Dumyahn and
Pijanowski, 2011b; Krause, 1987; Schafer, 1994). Increases in
technology and the spatial expansion of human populations over
the past century have radically expanded the presence and
magnitude of anthropogenic sounds in natural landscapes’
acoustic compositions. As a result, the long-term sustainability
of stable processes within both natural and human systems is
threatened. In natural systems, for example, the bioacoustic
changes in response to anthropogenic noise have been shown to
be a form of maladaptation across a wide variety of species.
The sexual signals of amphibians (Barber et al., 2010), birds
(Slabbekoorn and Ripmeester, 2008) and marine mammals
(Richardson et al., 1995) have all been impacted, resulting in
lower breeding success and population growth rates. The negative
feedback loops caused by increased anthropogenic noise can also
be traced through human systems as well, as the feedbacks
outlined in this paper illustrate. In short, as the acoustic
characteristics of a landscape change, biological and human
systems can be stressed; these stresses are negative feedbacks
that ultimately threaten the stability and sustainability of existing
processes within natural and human systems.
The solution, we suggest, must come from more proactive,
integrative and holistic policies at a variety of scales from local
planning guidelines to intergovernmental agreements and regulations. Speciﬁcally, we have offered two potential avenues for future
soundscape policies and planning processes to explore. The ﬁrst

72

J.W. Smith, B.C. Pijanowski / Global Environmental Change 28 (2014) 63–74

involves shifting from source-focused policies to spatially deﬁned
policies. Current policies that focus on well-known noise pollution
sources such as airports and railways are not sufﬁcient to fully
account for the negative impacts accruing within human
communities as a result of increases in unwanted noise exposures.
Future soundscape management policies are likely to gain much
more traction through a full accounting of negative impacts to
individual and community health. The second policy suggestion
we offered was for proactive city planners and environmental
managers to seek out ways to leverage existing policies and
guidelines as potential vehicles for soundscape management.
Within the United States, increased consideration of soundscape
impacts in environmental assessments and environmental impact
statements is needed. Internationally, and at local and regional
levels of government, spatially explicit planning frameworks such
as zoning offer initial and potentially fruitful points of exploration.
Successful soundscape policy will likely require decision makers to
explore novel pathways to development and implementation.
In conclusion, the presence of and ability to experience natural
soundscapes is dwindling worldwide as a result of increased
urbanization in developed countries and increased levels of
industrialization in the developing world. The most successful
policy solutions are likely to come from integrated solutions
informed by both the natural and social sciences. The human and
policy dimensions of soundscape ecology framework provides a
unifying model around which various allied social scientists can
situate their research. Collectively, this will lead to a more holistic
understanding of how human systems are impacted by, and
simultaneously shape, their soundscapes.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge Dr. Roger L. Moore, Dr.
Jonathan Beever, and Tian Guo for their comments and suggestions
on previous versions of the paper.
References
Adams, M., Cox, T., Moore, G., Croxford, B., Refaee, M., Sharples, S., 2006. Sustainable
soundscapes: noise policy and the urban experience. Urban Stud. 43, 2385–
2398, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00420980600972504.
Appleton, J., 1975. The Experience of Landscape. Wiley, New York.
Arsenio, E., Bristow, A.L., Wardman, M., 2006. Stated choice valuations of trafﬁc
related noise. Transp. Res. D: Transp. Environ. 11, 15–31, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.trd.2005.07.001.
Axelsson, O., Nilsson, M.E., Berglund, B., 2010. A principal components model of
soundscape perception. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 128, 2836–2846.
Babisch, W., 2008. Road trafﬁc noise and cardiovascular risk. Noise Health 10, 27–
33, http://dx.doi.org/10.4103/1463-1741.39005.
Balling, J.D., Falk, J.H., 1982. Development of visual preferences for natural landscapes. Environ. Behav. 14, 5–28.
Baranzini, A., Schaerer, C., Ramirez, J.V., Thalmann, P., 2010a. Feel it or measure it –
perceived vs. measured noise in hedonic models. Transp. Res. D: Transp.
Environ. 15D, 473–482.
Baranzini, A., Schaerer, C., Thalmann, P., 2010b. Using measured instead of perceived noise in hedonic models. Transp. Res. D: Transp. Environ. 15, 473–482,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trd.2010.06.002.
Barber, J.R., Crooks, K.R., Fristrup, K.M., 2010. The costs of chronic noise exposure for
terrestrial organisms. Trends Ecol. Evol. 25, 180–189, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.tree.2009.08.002.
Basso, E.B., 1985. A Musical View of the Universe: Kalapalo Myth and Ritual
Performances. University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia, PA.
Bennett, A., Peterson, R.A. (Eds.), 2004. Music Scenes: Local, Translocal, and Virtual.
Vanderbilt University Press, Nashville, TN.
Berglund, B., Eriksen, C.A., Nilsson, M.E., 2001. Perceptual characterization of
soundscapes in residential areas. In: Alippi, A. (Ed.), International Congress
on Acoustics 2001. International Commission for Acoustics, Rome, Italy, pp.
284–285.
Berglund, B., Lindvall, T., Schwela, D.H., 1999. Guidelines for community noise.
Berglund, B., Nilsson, M.E., 2006. On a tool for measuring soundscape quality in
urban residential areas. Acta Acust. United Acust. 92, 938–944.
Bertrand, N.F., 1997. Meta-analysis of studies of willingness to pay to reduce trafﬁc
noise. (M.Sc. dissertation)University College, London.
Bjork, E.A., 1985. The perceived quality of natural sounds. Acustica 57, 185–188.

Blackmore, S., 2000. The Meme Machine. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
Bradley, M.M., Lang, P.J., 2000. Affective reactions to acoustic stimuli. Psychophysiology 37, 204–215.
Braybrooke, D., Lindblom, C., 1963. A Strategy of Decision. Free Press of Glencoe,
New York.
Breakwell, G.M., 1992. Social Psychology of Identity and the Self Concept. Surrey
University Press, Guilford, Surrey, UK.
Brown, A.L., Kang, J., Gjestland, T., 2011. Towards standardization in soundscape
preference assessment. Appl. Acoust. 72, 387–392, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.apacoust.2011.01.001.
Bruner, G.C., 1990. Music, mood and marketing. J. Market. 54, 94–104.
Bunt, L., Hoskyns, S., 2002. The Handbook Of Music Therapy. Routledge, New York.
Burns, W., 1973. Noise and Man. John Murray, London.
Burt, J.L., Bartolome, D.S., Burdette, D.W., Comstock, J.R., 1995. A psychological
evaluation of the perceived urgency of auditory warning signals. Ergonomics
38, 2327–2340.
Cain, R., Jennings, P., Poxon, J., 2013. The development and application of the
emotional dimensions of a soundscape. Appl. Acoust. 74, 232–239, http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apacoust.2011.11.006.
Carson, R.T., Hanemann, W.M., 2005. Contingent valuation. In: Maler, K.-G., Vincent,
J.R. (Eds.), Handbook of Environmental Economics. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp.
821–936.
Cheung, S.N.S., 1987. Common property rights. In: Eatwell, J., Milgate, J., Newman, P.
(Eds.), The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics. Macmillan, London, pp.
504–505.
Cohen, A.J., 2001. Music as a source of emotion in ﬁlm. In: Juslin, P.N., Slodoba, J.A.
(Eds.), Music and Emotion: Theory and Research. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, United Kingdom, pp. 249–272.
Cohen, J.P., Coughlin, C.C., 2008. Spatial hedonic models of airport noise, proximity,
and housing prices. J. Reg. Sci. 48, 859–878, http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j. 14679787.2008.00569.x.
Cucurachi, S., Heijungs, R., Ohlau, K., 2012. Towards a general framework for
including noise impacts in LCA. Int. J. Life Cycle Assess. 17, 471–487, http://
dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11367-011-0377-4.
Davenport, M.A., Anderson, D.H., 2005. Getting from sense of place to place-based
management: an interpretive investigation of place meanings and perceptions
of landscape change. Soc. Nat. Resour. 18, 625–641, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
08941920590959613.
De Coensel, B., Botteldooren, D., 2006. The quiet rural soundscape and how to
characterize it. Acta Acust. United Acust. 92, 887–897.
Dubois, D., Gustavino, C., Raimbault, M., 2006. A cognitive approach to urban
soundscapes: using verbal data to access everyday life auditory categories.
Acta Acust. United Acust. 92, 865–874.
Dumyahn, S., Pijanowski, B.C., 2011a. Beyond noise mitigation: managing soundscapes as common-pool resources. Landsc. Ecol. 26, 1311–1326, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1007/s10980-011-9637-8.
Dumyahn, S., Pijanowski, B.C., 2011b. Soundscape conservation. Landsc. Ecol. 26,
1327–1344, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10980-011-9635-x.
Durlach, N.I., Mavor, A.S., 1994. Virtual Reality: Scientiﬁc and Technological Challenges. National Academies Press, Washington, DC.
European Commission Working Group Assessment of Exposure to Noise, 2006.
Good practice guide for strategic noise mapping and the production of associated data on noise exposure (No. WG-AEN 016) .
European Union, 2002. Directive 2002/49/EC relating to the assessment and management of environmental noise. Off. J. Eur. Commun. L189 .
Falk, J.H., Balling, J.D., 2010. Evolutionary inﬂuence on human landscape preference.
Environ. Behav. 42, 479–493, http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0013916509341244.
Farina, A., 2014a. Soundscape and landscape ecology. In: Soundscape Ecology:
Principles, Patterns, Methods, and Applications. Springer, Dordrecht, The
Netherlands, pp. 1–28.
Farina, A., 2014b. Human dimension of the soundscape: from individuals to society.
In: Soundscape Ecology. Springer, The Netherlands, pp. 107–142.
Farmer, M.C., Wallace, M.C., Shiroya, M., 2013. Bird diversity indicates ecological
value in urban home prices. Urban Ecosyst. 16, 131–144, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1007/s11252-011-0209-0.
Feld, S., 1990. Sound and Sentiment: Birds, Weeping, Poetics, and Song in Kaluli
Expression. University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia, PA.
Feld, S., 1991. Voices of the rainforest: politics of music. Public Cult. 4, 131–140.
Feld, S., 1996. Pygmy pop, a genealogy of schizophonic mimesis. Yearb. Tradit.
Music 28, 1–35.
Feld, S., 2000. A sweet lullaby for world music. Public Cult. 12, 145–171.
Feld, S., Brennies, D., 2004. Doing anthropology in sound. Am. Ethnol. 41, 461–474.
Ferguson, T.J., Berlin, G.L., Kuwanwisiwma, L.J., 2009. Kukhepya: searching for
Hopi trails. In: Snead, J.E., Erickson, C.L., Darling, A.J. (Eds.), Landscapes of
Movement: The Anthropology of Paths, Trails, and Roads. University of
Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology, Philadelphia, PA,
pp. 20–41.
Fletcher, N.H., 2007. Animal bioacoustics. In: Rossing, T.D. (Ed.), Handbook of
Acoustics. Springer, New York, pp. 785–802.
Gabrielsson, A., Sjögren, H., 1979. Perceived sound quality of sound reproducing
systems. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 65, 1019–1033.
Garcı́a-Llorente, M., Martı́n-López, B., Iniesta-Arandia, I., López-Santiago, C.A.,
Aguilera, P.A., Montes, C., 2012. The role of multi-functionality in social
preferences toward semi-arid rural landscapes: an ecosystem service
approach. Environ. Sci. Policy 19/20, 136–146, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.envsci.2012.01.006.

J.W. Smith, B.C. Pijanowski / Global Environmental Change 28 (2014) 63–74
Guastavino, C., Katz, B.F.G., 2004. Perceptual evaluation of multi-dimensional
spatial audio reproduction. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 116, 1105–1115, http://
dx.doi.org/10.1121/1.1763973.
Gustavino, C., 2006. The ideal urban soundscape: investigating the sound quality of
French cities. Acta Acust. United Acust. 92, 945–951.
Hansen, T.B., 2006. Sounds of freedom: music, taxis, and racial imagination in South
Africa. Public Cult. 18, 185–208.
Hirschkind, C., 2006. The Ethical Soundscape: Cassette Sermons and Islamic Counterpublics. Columbia University Press, New York.
Hvenegaard, G.T., 2002. Birder specialization differences in conservation involvement, demographics, and motivations. Hum. Dimens. Wildl. 7, 21–36, http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/108712002753574765.
International Standards Organization, 2013. Acoustics – Soundscape – Part 1:
Deﬁnition and Conceptual Framework (International Standard No. ISO/FDIS
12913-1) International Standards Organization.
Ittelson, W.H., Franck, K.A., O’Hanlon, T.J., 1976. The nature of environmental
experience. In: Wapner, S., Cohen, S., Kaplan, B. (Eds.), Experiencing the Environment. Plenum, New York, pp. 187–206.
Jennings, P., Cain, R., 2013. A framework for improving urban soundscapes. Appl.
Acoust. 74, 293–299.
Jorgensen, B.S., Stedman, R.C., 2001. Sense of place as an attitude: lakeshore owners’
attitude toward their properties. J. Environ. Psychol. 21, 233–248.
Juslin, P.N., Slodoba, J.A. (Eds.), 2001. Music and Emotion: Theory and Research.
Oxford University Press, Oxford, United Kingdom.
Juslin, P.N., Västfjäll, D., 2008. Emotional responses to music: the need to consider
underlying mechanisms. Behav. Brain Sci. 31, 559–621.
Kaplan, R., Kaplan, S., 1989. Experience and Nature: A Psychological Perspective.
Cambridge University Press, New York.
Kaplan, S., 1992. Environmental preference in a knowledge-seeking knowledgeusing organism. In: Barkow, J.H., Cosmides, L., Tooby, J. (Eds.), The Adapted
Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture. Oxford University Press, New York, pp. 581–600.
Kawai, K., Kojima, T., Hirate, K., Yakuoka, M., 2004. Personal evaluation structure of
environmental sounds: experiments of subjective evaluation using subjects’
own terms. J. Sound Vib. 277, 523–533.
Kerrick, J.S., Nagel, D.C., Bennet, R.L., 1969. Multiple ratings of sound stimuli. J.
Acoust. Soc. Am. 45, 1014–1017.
King, E.A., Murphy, E., Rice, H.J., 2011. Implementation of the EU environmental
noise directive: lessons from the ﬁrst phase of strategic noise mapping and
action planning in Ireland. J. Environ. Manage. 92, 756–764, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.jenvman.2010.10.034.
Krause, B., 1987. Bioacoustics, habitat ambience in ecological balance. Whole Earth
Rev. 57, 14–18.
Kryter, K.D., 1985. The Effects of Noise on Man. Academic Press, London.
Kuehne, L.M., Padgham, B.L., Olden, J.D., 2013. The soundscapes of lakes across an
urbanization gradient. PLoS ONE 8, e55661, http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0055661.
Laiolo, P., 2010. The emerging signiﬁcance of bioacoustics in animal species
conservation. Biol. Conserv. 143, 1635–1645, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2010.03.025.
Lewis, J.W., Talkington, W.J., Tallaksen, K.C., Frum, C.A., 2012. Auditory object
salience: human cortical processing of non-biological action sounds and their
acoustic signal attributes. Front. Syst. Neurosci. 6 , http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/
fnsys.2012.00027.
Litovsky, R.Y., 2012. Development of binaural and spatial hearing. In: Werner, L.A.,
Fay, R.R., Popper, A.N. (Eds.), Human Auditory Development. Springer, New
York, pp. 163–195.
Liu, J., Dietz, T., Carpenter, S.R., Folke, C., Alberti, M., Redman, C.L., Schneider, S.H.,
Ostrom, E., Pell, A.N., Lubchenco, J., Taylor, W.W., Ouyang, Z., Deadman, P., Kratz,
T., Provencher, W., 2007. Coupled human and natural systems. AMBIO 36, 639–
649, http://dx.doi.org/10.1579/0044-7447(2007)36[639:CHANS]2.0.CO;2.
Loomis, J.M., Blascovich, J.J., 1999. Immersive virtual environment technology as a
basic research tool in psychology. Behav. Res. Methods Instrum. Comput. 31,
557–564.
McEwen, B.S., 2000. Allostasis and allostatic load. In: Fink, G. (Ed.), Encyclopedia of
Stress. Academic Press, London, England, pp. 145–149.
McEwen, B.S., Seeman, T., 1999. Protective and damaging effects of mediators of
stress: elaborating and testing the concepts of allostasis and allostatic load. Ann.
N. Y. Acad. Sci. 896, 30–47.
Miedema, H.M., Oudshoorn, C.G., 2001. Annoyance from transportation noise:
relationships with exposure metrics DNL and DENL and their conﬁdence
intervals. Environ. Health Perspect. 109, 409–416.
Miedema, H.M.E., 2007. Annoyance caused by environmental noise: elements for
evidence-based noise policies. J. Soc. Issues 63, 41–57, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1111/j. 1540-4560.2007.00495.x.
Ministry of Infrastructure and Environment, 2011. Response on Amendments
Related to the Parliamentary Discussion on Swung Legislation (No.
LOK2011.049311) Ministry of Infrastructure and Environment, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands.
Morgan, P., 2010. Towards a developmental theory of place attachment. J. Environ.
Psychol. 30, 11–22, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2009.07.001.
Moudon, A.V., 2009. Real noise from the urban environment: how ambient community noise affects health and what can be done about it. Am. J. Prev. Med. 37,
167–171, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2009.03.019.
Murphy, E., King, E.A., 2010. Strategic environmental noise mapping: methodological issues concerning the implementation of the EU Environmental Noise

73

Directive and their policy implications. Environ. Int. 36, 290–298, http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2009.11.006.
Murphy, E., King, E.A., 2011. Scenario analysis and noise action planning: modelling
the impact of mitigation measures on population exposure. Appl. Acoust. 72,
487–494, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apacoust.2010.10.006.
Murphy, E., King, E.A., Rice, H.J., 2009. Estimating human exposure to transport
noise in central Dublin, Ireland. Environ. Int. 35, 298–302, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.envint.2008.07.026.
Muzet, A., 2007. Environmental noise, sleep and health. Sleep Med. Rev. 11, 135–
142, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.smrv.2006.09.001.
National Park Service, 2001. Director’s Order 12 Handbook. National Park Service,
Washington, DC.
Navrud, S., 2002. The State-of-the-Art on Economic Valuation of Noise: Final Report
to the European Commission. Agricultural University of Norway, Oslo, Norway.
Nelson, J.P., 1982. Highway noise and property values: a survey of recent evidence. J.
Transp. Econ. Policy 16, 117–138.
Nelson, J.P., 2004. Meta-analysis of airport noise and hedonic property values. J.
Transp. Econ. Policy 38, 1–27.
Nelson, J.P., 2008. Hedonic property value studies of transportation noise: aircraft
and road trafﬁc. In: Baranzini, A., Ramirez, J., Schaerer, C., Thalmann, P. (Eds.),
Hedonic Methods in Housing Markets. Springer, New York, pp. 57–82.
Nilsson, M.E., 2007. A-weighted sound pressure level as an indicator of perceived
loudness and annoyance of road-trafﬁc sound. J. Sound Vib. 302, 197–207.
Nilsson, M.E., Berglund, B., 2006. Soundscape quality in suburban green areas and
city parks. Acta Acust. United Acust. 92, 903–911.
OFEFP, 2002. Fiche d’information lutte contre le bruit. OFEFP, Berne, Switzerland.
OFS (Ofﬁce Federal de la Statistique), OFEFP, 1997. L’environnement en Suisse,
1997. OFS and OFEFP, Berne, Switzerland.
Orians, G.H., 1980. Habitat selection: general theory and application to human
behavior. In: Lockard, J.S. (Ed.), The Evolution of Human Social Behavior. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 49–63.
Orians, G.H., Heerwagen, J.H., 1992. Evolved responses to landscapes. In: Barkow,
J.H., Cosmides, L., Tooby, J. (Eds.), The Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology
and the Generation of Culture. Oxford University Press, New York, pp. 555–579.
Payne, S.R., Davies, W.J., Adams, M.D., 2009. Research into the practical policy
applications of soundscape concepts and techniques in urban areas (No.
NANR200) Department of Environment, Food, and Rural Affairs.
Pekin, B.K., Jung, J., Villanueva-Rivera, L.J., Pijanowski, B.C., Ahumada, J.A., 2012.
Modeling acoustic diversity using soundscape recordings and LIDAR-derived
metrics of vertical forest structure in a neotropical rainforest. Landsc. Ecol. 27,
1513–1522, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10980-012-9806-4.
Pijanowski, B.C., Farina, A., Gage, S., Dumyahn, S., Krause, B., 2011a. What is
soundscape ecology? An introduction and overview of an emerging new science.
Landsc. Ecol. 26, 1213–1232, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10980-011-9600-8.
Pijanowski, B.C., Villanueva-Rivera, L.J., Dumyahn, S.L., Farina, A., Krause, B.L.,
Napoletano, B.M., Gage, S.H., Pieretti, N., 2011b. Soundscape ecology: the
science of sound in the landscape. BioScience 61, 203–216.
Proppe, D.S., Sturdy, C.B., St.Clair, C.C., 2013. Anthropogenic noise decreases urban
songbird diversity and may contribute to homogenization. Glob. Change Biol.
19, 1075–1084, http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/gcb.12098.
Proshansky, H., Fabian, A., Kaminoff, R., 1983. Place-identity: physical world socialization of the self. J. Environ. Psychol. 3, 57–83, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0272-4944(83)80021-8.
Raimbault, M., Lavandier, C., Bérengier, M., 2003. Ambient sound assessment of
urban environments: ﬁeld studies in two French cities. Appl. Acoust. 64, 1241–
1256, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0003-682X(03)00061-6.
Richardson, W.J., Greene, C.R., Malme, C.I., Thomson, D.H., 1995. Marine Mammals
and Noise. Academic Press, San Diego, CA.
Richerson, P.J., Boyd, R., 2004. Not by Genes Alone: How Culture Transformed
Human Evolution. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Roseman, M., 1991. Healing Sounds from the Malaysian Rainforest: Temiar Music
and Medicine. University of California Press, Berkeley, CA.
Ruddell, E.J., Gramann, J.H., 1994. Goal orientation, norms, and noise-induced
conﬂict among recreation area users. Leis. Sci. 16, 93–104, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1080/01490409409513222.
Russell, J.A., 2003. Core affect and the psychological construction of emotion.
Psychol. Rev. 110, 145–172.
Ryden, K.C., 1993. Mapping the Invisible Landscape: Folklore, Writing, and the
Sense of Place. University of Iowa Press, Ames, IA.
Sakakeeny, M., 2010. Under the bridge: an orientation to soundscapes in New
Orleans. Ethnomusicology 54, 1–27.
Sallis, J.F., Floyd, M.F., Rodrı́guez, D.A., Saelens, B.E., 2012. Role of built environments
in physical activity, obesity, and cardiovascular disease. Circulation 125, 729–
737, http://dx.doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.969022.
Salvi, M., 2007. Spatial Estimation of the Impact of Airport Noise on Residential
Housing Prices (SSRN Scholarly Paper No. ID 1000217) Social Science Research
Network, Rochester, NY.
Samuels, D.W., Meintjes, L., Ochoa, A.M., Porcello, T., 2010. Soundscapes: toward a
sounded anthropology. Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 39, 329–345, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1146/annurev-anthro-022510-132230.
Schafer, R.M., 1977. The Tuning of the World. Alfred A. Knopf, New York.
Schafer, R.M., 1994. The Soundscape: Our Sonic Environment and the Tuning of the
World. Destiny Books, Rochester, VT.
Scott, D., Ditton, R.B., Stoll, J.R., Eubanks, T.L., 2005. Measuring specialization among
birders: utility of a self-classiﬁcation measure. Hum. Dimens. Wildl. 10, 53–74,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10871200590904888.

74

J.W. Smith, B.C. Pijanowski / Global Environmental Change 28 (2014) 63–74

Seeger, A., 1987. Why Saya Sing: A Musical Anthropology of an Amazonian People.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Seeger, A., 2003. Globalization from a local perspective in Brazil: the Suyá Indians
and música sertaneja. In: Loza, S. (Ed.), Musical Cultures of Latin America, Global
Effects, Past and Present. Selected Reports in Ethnomusicology. Ethnomusicology. University of California, Los Angeles, pp. 121–128.
Servick, K., 2014. Eavesdropping on ecosystems. Science 343, 834–837.
Seto, E.Y.W., Holt, A., Rivard, T., Bhatia, R., 2007. Spatial distribution of trafﬁc
induced noise exposures in a US city: an analytic tool for assessing the health
impacts of urban planning decisions. Int. J. Health Geogr. 6, 1186–1211.
Sharp, D., 2010. Noisy days, noisy nights. J. Urban Health 87, 349–351, http://
dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11524-010-9440-x.
Slabbekoorn, H., Ripmeester, E.A.P., 2008. Birdsong and anthropogenic noise:
implications and applications for conservation. Mol. Ecol. 17, 72–83, http://
dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-294X.2007.03487.x.
Smith, J.W., Davenport, M.A., Anderson, D.H., Leahy, J.E., 2011. Place meanings and
desired management outcomes. Landsc. Urban Plan. 101, 359–370, http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2011.03.002.
Stansfeld, S.A., 1992. Noise, noise sensitivity and psychiatric disorder: epidemiological and psychophysiological studies. Psychol. Med. Monogr. Suppl. 22S, 1–44.
Stansfeld, S.A., Berglund, B., Clark, C., Lopez-Barrio, I., Fischer, P., Öhrström, E.,
Haines, M.M., Head, J., Hygge, S., van Kamp, I., Berry, B.F., 2005. Aircraft and road
trafﬁc noise and children’s cognition and health: a cross-national study. Lancet
365, 1942–1949, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(05)66660-3.
Stansfeld, S.A., Haines, M., Brown, B., 2000a. Noise and health in the
urban environment. Rev. Environ. Health 15 , http://dx.doi.org/10.1515/
REVEH.2000.15.1-2.43.
Stansfeld, S.A., Haines, M., Burr, M., Berry, B., Lercher, P., 2000b. A review of
environmental noise and mental health. Noise Health 2, 1–8.
Stansfeld, S.A., Matheson, M.P., 2003. Noise pollution: non-auditory effects on
health. Br. Med. Bull. 68, 243–257, http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/bmb/ldg033.
Stern, P.C., 2000. Toward a coherent theory of environmentally signiﬁcant behavior.
J. Soc. Issues 56, 407–424.
Stewart, W.P., 1992. Inﬂuence of the onsite experience on recreation experience
judgments. J. Leis. Res. 24, 185–198.
Tempesta, T., 2010. The perception of agrarian historical landscapes: a study of the
Veneto plain in Italy. Landsc. Urban Plan. 97, 258–272, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.landurbplan.2010.06.010.
The Commission to the European Parliament and Council, 2011. On the Implementation of the Environmental Noise Directive in Accordance with Article 11 of
Directive 2002/49/EC. European Commission, Brussels, Belgium.
Theebe, M.A.J., 2004. Planes, trains, and automobiles: the impact of trafﬁc noise on
house prices. J. Real Estate Finan. Econ. 28, 209–234, http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/
B:REAL.0000011154.92682.4b.
Truax, B., 1999. Handbook for Acoustic Ecology, 2nd ed. Cambridge Street Publishing, Cambridge, MA.

Tuan, Y.F., 1974. Topophilia: A Study of Environmental Perception, Attitudes, and
Values. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Tucker, D., Gage, S.H., Williamson, I., Fuller, S., 2014. Linking ecological condition
and the soundscape in fragmented Australian forests. Landsc. Ecol. 29, 745–758,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10980-014-0015-1.
Turnbull, C.M., 1961. The Forest People. Simon & Schuster, New York.
Turnbull, C.M., Chapman, F.S., 1992. Mbutu Pygmies of the Ituri Rainforest. Smithson Folkways CD 40401, Washington, DC.
Turner, B.L., Lambin, E.F., Reenberg, A., 2007. The emergence of land change science
for global environmental change and sustainability. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
104, 20666–20671, http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0704119104.
US Department of Housing and Urban Development, 1979. Environmental criteria
and standards, 24 CFR Part 51.
Van Kempen, E.E.M.M., Kruize, H., Boshuizen, H.C., Ameling, C.B., Staatsen, B.A.M., de
Hollander, A.E.M., 2002. The association between noise exposure and blood
pressure and ischemic heart disease: a meta-analysis. Environ. Health Perspect.
110, 307–317.
Västfjäll, D., Kleiner, M., Gärling, T., 2003. Affective reactions to interior aircraft
sounds. Acta Acust. United Acust. 89, 693–701.
Viollon, S., Lavandier, C., 2000. Multidimensional assessment of the acoustic quality
of urban environments. In: Cassereau, D. (Ed.), Inter Noise 2000. International
Institute of Noise Control Engineering, Nice, France, pp. 2279–2284.
Wallach, J., 2008. Modern noise, ﬂuid genres: popular music in Indonesia, 1997–
2001. University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, WI.
Wallin, N., Merker, B., Brown, S., 2000. The Origins of Music. MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA.
Wardman, M., Bristow, A.L., 2004. Trafﬁc related noise and air quality valuations:
evidence from stated preference residential choice models. Transp. Res. D:
Transp. Environ. 9, 1–27, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1361-9209(03)00042-7.
Weber, M., 2013. Noise policy: sound policy? A meta level analysis and evaluation of
noise policy in the Netherlands. (Doctoral dissertation)University of Utrecht,
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
Werner, L.A., 2012. Overview and issues in human auditory development. In:
Werner, L.A., Fay, R.R., Popper, A.N. (Eds.), Human Auditory Development.
Springer, New York.
White, B.W., 2008. Rhumba Rules: The Politics of Dance Music in Mobutu’s Zaire.
Duke University Press, Durham, NC.
WHO Regional Ofﬁce for Europe, 2009. Night Noise Guidelines for Europe. World
Health Organization, Copenhagen.
Wilson, E.O., 2004. On Human Nature. Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.
Wisdom, S., 2007. Role in science in assessing noise impacts on wildlife under
National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA). J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 122 , http://
dx.doi.org/10.1121/1.2943008, 3082–3082.
World Health Organization, 2011. Burden of Disease from Environmental Noise:
Quantiﬁcation of Healthy Life Years Lost in Europe. World Health Organization,
Regional Ofﬁce for Europe, Copenhagen, Denmark.

