Visualization Research of the Tweet Diffusion in the
Microblog Network
Jing Lu Xiaoqing Yu

Wanggen Wan

Jing Lu

School of Communication and Information Engineering
Shanghai University
Shanghai, China
yxq@staff.shu.edu.cn

School of Electronics and Information Engineering
Shanghai University of Electric Power
Shanghai, China

powerful research direction and has a broad prospect of
application. It can make the boring microblog data become
vivid and complex microblog data relationships become clear.

Abstract—With the development of big data technology,
information visualization plays an increasingly important role in
the social network, especially the microblog network. The path of
the tweet diffusion shows the relationships among microblog
users and constructs a directed network among them. The
microblog data mining project and the visualization process of
the tweet propagation are described in detail. The visualization
results of the tweet propagation indicate that there are two
typical transmission path patterns: the dandelion pattern and the
double-star pattern. The visualization research may easily
discover the key retweeting nodes in the tweet diffusion network.
Keywords—microblog;
diffusion;path

I.

visualization;

retweeting;

Researches have built some visualizations for analyzing
social network and microblog data from different domains.
Jose[3] presented network visualization as s way to analyze
and to test the design of a website. Patrick[4] proposed a
platform which could provide a SNA(social network analysis)
visualization for dark network analysis. J.Ratkiewicz[5]
researched political discourses on twitter from three
perspectives: networking topics, networking media objects and
networking actors and showed the visualization diagram of the
interaction network of Twitter users discussing the Pelinka case.
Hakan Kardes[6] obtained a better picture of organization
collaborative patterns in the funded research network. These
scholars put the visualization research emphasis on the static
member structure of the network, while the visualization of the
information propagation is dynamic and more complex in
structure. Ref.[7] built a system which consisted of two
interfaces: a web-based online visualization interface for public
users and an offline expert visual analytic system and could
visualize Weibo events, but unfortunately, it didn’t show the
specific process of data mining.

tweet

INTRODUCTION

Microblog service has emerged as a new medium. Users
can post tweets within a limit of 140 characters to share
information, discuss ideas and exchange opinions. One of the
popular microblog platforms is Twitter, which is commonly
adopted almost all over the world. In China, Weibo, a Chineseversion microblog service, has played an important role in
people’s life. According to the official statistics from China
Internet Information Center (CNNIC), up to the end of
December 2013, the number of microblog registered users is
281 million. More and more people like the “grassroots
media”---Weibo.

In this paper, the visualization method of the tweet
diffusion in the microblog network will be developed in the
aim of better understanding the microblog network. The paper
is organized as follows. In Section II, we will simply introduce
the concept of the information visualization and the Gephi
platform. The data mining scheme in the microblog network
will be described in Section III. Section IV will show two
propagation path modes in the microblog network and their
visualization results. Finally, we will discuss the visualization
research results and what can be further expected in Section V.

In the microblog network, the follower-friend relationship
is the essence of the information diffusion and the retweet
function is the key element. If user B follows user A in the
microblog, B is called a follower of A, while A is called a
friend of B. User B can read all the tweets created or retweeted
by A without any approvals[1]. If user B sees a tweet that he
feels would be interesting or helpful to his followers, he can
just retweet the post with/without comments by simply
pressing the retweeting button. The message will diffuse
extensively after several rounds of retweeting. The path of the
tweet transmission shows the relationships among microblog
users and constructs a directed network among them[2].

II.

A. Information Visualization
Data analysis is an indispensable part of all applied
research and problem solving in practical activities. The most
fundamental data analysis approaches are statistics,
visualization, data mining and machine learning methods.
Among these approaches, information visualization is the most

The information in the microblog network is massive,
complex and unstructured, so traditional data analysis methods
have been difficult to adapt to these features. The visualization
analysis of microblog data using visualization tools is a very

978-1-4799-3903-9/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE

INFORMATION VISUALIZATION AND GEPHI
PLATFORM

592

ICALIP2014

reliant on the cognitive skills of human analysts, and allows the
discovery of unstructured actionable insights that are limited
only by human imagination and creativity.

somewhat cumbersome. Fig.2 reveals the authorization code
flow. After building some web application in the API platform,
the user agent may get the redirection URL and the client
identifier, such as ͆app_key͇ and ͆app_secret͇ from the
client. The authorization server then will send an authorization
code to the user agent on the basis of them. After that, the
client needs to transmit again the authorization code along with
the redirection URL to the authorization server and it will
response back with an access_token to the client. Finally, the
client obtains OAuth 2.0 authorization of the Sina Weibo API.

Information visualization is the study of visual
representations of abstract, nonphysical data to reinforce
human cognition. The abstract, nonphysical data includes both
numerical and non-numerical data, such as text, hierarchies and
geographic information. It is not only about creating graphical
displays of complex and latent information structures. It also
contributes to a broader range of cognitive, social and
collaborative activities.

Fig. 1. Conceptual illustration of information visualization

Fig.1 shows the conceptual illustration of information
visualization. Information visualization is based on the data. To
obtain useful knowledge from “big data”, information
visualization must aid machine learning and data mining
methods which have made considerable progress in recent
years. Meanwhile, the user interface for the successful
application of visualization technology also plays a key role.
Users need to interact with the representation and manipulates
the structures, shapes and colors to reveal hidden properties.

Fig. 2. Authorization code flow

B. Propagation Path of the Tweets

D

B. Gephi Platform
Gephi is an interactive visualization and exploration
platform for all kinds of networks and complex systems,
dynamic and hierarchical graphs[8]. It uses a special 3D render
engine to render large graphs in real-time. Powered by its adhoc OpenGL engine, Gephi is pushing the envelope on how
interactive and efficient network exploration can be.

A

Layout algorithms give the shape to the graph. Gephi
provides state-of-the-art algorithms layout algorithms, both for
efficiency and quality. The Layout palette allows user to
change layout settings while running, and therefore
dramatically increase user feedback and experience.

B

Fig. 3. The propagation path of one tweet

As shown in Fig.3, the bigger node A represents the
original tweeter who creates the seed account and the linked
nodes are the followers. A solid bold line means that the tweet
has spread through the link by a retweet. After the user A posts
a tweet, user B who is one of the four followers of the user A,
may read this tweet and retweet it according to his own
interests. And user C retweets it again who is the follower of
the user B, and then the user D repeats the work. While the user
retweets the message, he can comment it within 140 words.
The system will display the words “retweeting the post”
automatically if the user directly retweets without any
comment in the Sina Weibo. Finally, in the homepage of the
user D, it is shown as follows:

Gephi is a complementary tool to traditional statistics, as
visual thinking with interactive interfaces is now recognized to
facilitate reasoning. The goal of the Gephi platform is to help
data analysts to intuitively discover patterns, make hypothesis,
and isolate structure singularities or faults during the data
analysis process.
III.

C

DATA MINING SCHEME

A. Preparatory Work
We choose Sina Weibo as our research object as it is the
most famous microblog service company in China. Tweets are
collected from Sina Weibo website through the open API
(Application Programming Interface) platform. The
authentication process of API using the OAuth 2.0 protocol is

593

A. The Dandelion Mode
The URL of the representative tweet of the dandelion mode
is http://www.weibo.com/1892680923/zdwwStWgM, which
was created at 16:24 on January 8, 2013 and the data
acquisition time was at 18:43 on May 29, 2013. The original
author of this tweet is “Mathematical Culture” who is an
adding V authenticated user. Fig.6 shows the diffusion path of
the tweet. The tweet is retweeted the total 437 times. Repeat
retweeting is regarded as only one edge, so there are actual 432
nodes and 435 edges in this transmission network graph. In the
process of 437 times retweeting, there are 266 times
completing only one-level spread and they are corresponding
red nodes and edges in the graph. Blue nodes indicate that they
participate in two-step flow or more spread. Gray edges mean
links between the original node and all two-step flow nodes.
Fig.6 presents the dandelion secondary explosive propagation
pattern, which corresponds to the diffusion path characteristics
of the grassroots celebrity microblog.

<comment 1>//@user C’s screen_name:<comment 2>//@user
B’s screen_name:<comment 3>
@user A’s screen_name
one post of the user A
Fig. 4. The display of the homepage of the user D

In Fig.4, the comments 1, 2, 3 respectively corresponding
to the user D, C and B’s comment are optional. If all the
comments are default, the last comment 3 must show the words
“retweeting the post”. In Sina Weibo, “//@”is the tag indicating
the retweet relation between a pair of nodes, so the path of this
tweet diffusion creates a chain as shown in Fig.5.

A

B

C

D

Fig. 5. The path of this tweet diffusion

The tweet is originally posted by user A, and is retweeted
by user B, C and D in turn. User B is the first retweeter among
them.
C. Visualization Process of the Tweet Diffusion
It is interesting that the visualization process of the tweet
diffusion need to use the API in Sina Weibo.
Step 1: The integer ID of the objective tweet can be
obtained through its URL. The ID parameter is passed as part
of the URL itself.
Step 2: After the client accesses the API, several fields
which are formatted JSON(JavaScript Object Notation) data
such as reposts_count, comments_count, retweeted_status, user,
geo, text, created_at, and so on, will be returned through the
request parameter ID.
Step 3: The “text” field, such as:
“<comment 1>//@user C’s screen_name:<comment 2>//@user
B’s screen_name:<comment 3>” in the above example, may be
divided using the tag “//@” and results will be written to an
CSV(Common Separated Value) file.
Step 4: The “screen_name” can be extracted from the CSV
file and then nodes and directed edges between two nodes will
be added into the Gexf(Graph Exchange XML Format) file.
Step 5: In the Gephi platform, the Gexf file needs to be
loaded. It is necessary for the visualization process to select an
appropriate layout algorithm and finally the visualization result
of the tweet propagation will be exported to a PDF or PNG file.
IV.

Fig. 6. Dandelion secondary explosive propagation pattern

VISUALIZATION RESULTS

We find two typical tweet propagation path modes after
researching several tweets propagation paths by means of the
API in Sina Weibo. They are the dandelion mode and the
double-star mode. Here are two typical representatives for the
tweet spread path.

594

Jimmy Lin” is 1740. So the double-star explosive propagation
pattern is formed, which corresponds to the diffusion path
characteristics of the advertisement microblog with celebrity
endorsements, such as movie stars, famous athletes, et al or the
microblog controversy between both celebrities.

B. The Double-Star Mode

V.

CONCLUSION

In the aim of better understanding the tweet diffusion
process, the visualization method is studied.
From the visualization results of the tweet propagation path,
we can easily answer the following two questions: 1) What is
the role of this node in the tweet diffusion process? 2) Who is
the key role in the tweet diffusion process? It is helpful for the
analysis of the node’s influence in the next work.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This paper is supported by the National High Technology
Research and Development Program of China (863 Program)
under Grant NO. 2013AA01A603.

REFERENCES
[1]
Fig. 7. Double-star explosive propagation pattern
[2]

The URL of the representative tweet of the double-star
mode is http://weibo.com/1738475764/zvU3pC0vl, which was
created at 13:23 on May 9, 2013 and the data acquisition time
was at 11:13 on May 28, 2013. The original author of this
tweet is “Quaker Oats” who is the official microblog account
of the Quaker Oats Company and also an adding V
authenticated user. The tweet itself is an endorsement
advertisement by Mr. Jimmy Lin. Fig.7 shows the diffusion
path of the tweet. The tweet has been retweeted the total 2353
times when the data is collected and there are actual 2223
nodes and 2314 edges in this transmission network graph. In
the process of 2353 times retweeting, there are only 288 times
completing just one-level spread. In fact, after Mr. Jimmy Lin
retweeted the tweet at 9:32 on May 10, 2013, the tweet was
retweeted many times by his large number of followers. As
shown in Fig.7, the node “Dreamer Jimmy Lin” which is the
microblog account of Mr. Jimmy Lin plays the most important
retweeting role in the tweet diffusion process. The out-degree
value of the node “Quaker Oats” is 299, but the node “Dreamer

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

595

W. Will, A.Stuart, and W.Roger, “Retweeting: a study of messageforwarding in twitter,’’ Mobile and Onine Social Networks(MOSN),
2011 Workshop on Milan, pp. 13-18, Sept. 2011.
Tatsuro Kawamoto, “A stochastic model of tweet diffusion on the twitter
network,”Physica A,vol. 392, pp.3470-3475, 2013.
Jose luis Ortega,Isidro F.Aguillo, “Network visualisation as a way to the
web usage analysis,” Aslib proceedings: New information perspectives,
vol. 65, pp.40-53, 2013.
Patrick M.Dudas, “Cooperative, dynamic twitter parsing and
visualization for dark network analysis,” iConference Proceedings,
pp. 623-632, 2013.
J. Ratkiewicz, M. Conover, M. Meiss, B. Gonc¸alves, S. Patil, A. Flammini, and F. Menczer, “Truthy: mapping the spread of astroturf in microblog streams,” InProceedings of the 20th international conference
companion on World Wide Web, pp. 249–252, 2011.
Hakan Kardes, Abdullah Sevincer, Mehmet Hadi Gunes, and Murat
Yuksel, “Six Degrees of Separation among US Researchers,”
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social Networks
Analysis and Mining, ASONAM 2012, pp. 654-659, 2012.
Donghao Ren, Xin Zhang, Zhenhuang Wang, Jing Li and Xiaoru Yuan,
“WeiboEvents: A Crowd Sourcing Weibo Visual Analytic System,”
Proceedings of IEEE Pacific Visualization Symposium, Yokohama,
Japan, pp.330-334, Mar. 2014.
Bastian M, Heymann S, Jacomy M, “Gephi: An open source software
for exploring and manipulating networks,” International AAAI
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, 2009.

