1992

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 19, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

UTOPIAN: User-Driven Topic Modeling
Based on Interactive Nonnegative Matrix Factorization
Jaegul Choo, Changhyun Lee, Chandan K. Reddy, and Haesun Park

Fig. 1. An overview of UTOPIAN. Given a scatter plot visualization generated by the modified t-SNE, UTOPIAN provides various
interaction capabilities: (1) topic merging, (2) document-induced topic creation, (3) topic splitting, and (4) keyword-induced topic
creation. Additionally, the user can refine topic keyword weights. The document viewer highlights the representative keywords
from each topic.
Abstract—Topic modeling has been widely used for analyzing text document collections. Recently, there have been significant
advancements in various topic modeling techniques, particularly in the form of probabilistic graphical modeling. State-of-the-art
techniques such as Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) have been successfully applied in visual text analytics. However, most of the
widely-used methods based on probabilistic modeling have drawbacks in terms of consistency from multiple runs and empirical
convergence. Furthermore, due to the complicatedness in the formulation and the algorithm, LDA cannot easily incorporate various
types of user feedback. To tackle this problem, we propose a reliable and flexible visual analytics system for topic modeling called
UTOPIAN (User-driven Topic modeling based on Interactive Nonnegative Matrix Factorization). Centered around its semi-supervised
formulation, UTOPIAN enables users to interact with the topic modeling method and steer the result in a user-driven manner. We
demonstrate the capability of UTOPIAN via several usage scenarios with real-world document corpuses such as InfoVis/VAST paper
data set and product review data sets.
Index Terms—Latent Dirichlet allocation, nonnegative matrix factorization, topic modeling, visual analytics, interactive clustering, text
analytics

1
• Jaegul Choo is with Georgia Institute of Technology. E-mail:
jaegul.choo@cc.gatech.edu.
• Changhyun Lee is with Georgia Institute of Technology. E-mail:
clee407@gatech.edu.
• Chandan K. Reddy is with Wayne State University. E-mail:
reddy@cs.wayne.edu.
• Haesun Park is with Georgia Institute of Technology. E-mail:
hpark@cc.gatech.edu.
Manuscript received 31 March 2013; accepted 1 August 2013; posted online
13 October 2013; mailed on 4 October 2013.
For information on obtaining reprints of this article, please send
e-mail to: tvcg@computer.org.
1077-2626/13/$31.00 © 2013 IEEE

I NTRODUCTION

Due to an ever increasing amount of document data and complexities involved with analyzing them in practice, revealing meaningful
insights and thus guiding users in their decision-making processes has
long been an active area of research. Among various approaches to
tackle these problems, a topic modeling approach, which discovers semantically meaningful topics from a document corpus, has been gaining popularity in both the fields of data mining/machine learning and
visual analytics.
Similar to many other techniques dealing with document data, most
of these topic modeling approaches take an input in the form of
a term-document matrix representation of documents via a bag-ofwords model. Different kinds of definitions about topic modeling may
exist, but from a practical standpoint, the topic modeling approaches
typically give two types of outputs: (1) a representation of each topic
Published by the IEEE Computer Society

CHOO ET AL: UTOPIAN: USER-DRIVEN TOPIC MODELING BASED ON INTERACTIVE NONNEGATIVE MATRIX

in terms of a weighted combination of keywords, or a keyword-wise
topic representation in short, and (2) a representation of each document in terms of a weighted combination of topics, or a topic-wise document representation in short. In the two representations, the weight
indicates how closely a particular keyword is related to the corresponding topic/document and how closely a particular topic is related to the
corresponding document, respectively.
From this perspective, topic modeling is related to soft clustering
where the documents are represented as weighted combinations of
clusters in terms of their proximity to each cluster, which essentially
play the same role of the second output of topic modeling. However,
soft clustering typically tends to focus only on how closely a particular document is related to each cluster while topic modeling deals with
both types of outputs including the semantic meaning of each cluster/topic on its own. The work presented in this paper deals with the
latter case, and we primarily present our system in the context of topic
modeling.
Allowing some relaxation on topic modeling definitions by involving possibly negative weights on the topic modeling output, the history
of topic modeling approaches traces back to a well-known traditional
technique called latent semantic indexing (LSI) [11]. However, researchers and end-users have had difficulties in making sense out of
negative weights on keywords or topics, which prevent LSI from being
used in real-world domains. Alternatively, more recent methods have
focused on probabilistic models that have nice interpretation properties in their outputs since both of the above-mentioned outcomes are all
non-negative and are summed up to one under a probabilistic framework. These probabilistic topic modeling methods, such as probabilistic latent semantic indexing (p-LSI) [17] and latent Dirichlet allocation
(LDA) [4], have become popular in various domains. Especially, LDA
has also been widely applied in visual analytics domain primarily due
to its excellent performances compared to most of the previous approaches.
However, when applied in visual analytics, LDA has several practical shortcomings in terms of consistency from multiple runs and empirical convergence. As will be described in Section 6, the former
indicates how stable the algorithm output remains from multiple runs
with the same setting while the latter indicates how early the algorithm converges from a user’s point of view compared to algorithmic
convergence. Furthermore, due to the complicatedness in the formulation and the algorithm, incorporating various types of user feedback
with LDA is relatively difficult.
In order to overcome these drawbacks, we propose a reliable and
flexible topic modeling visual analytics system called UTOPIAN
(User-driven Topic modeling based on Interactive Nonnegative Matrix
Factorization). Nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) [30, 25] has
been one of the most active research areas in data mining and machine
learning fields, and it has been applied in the context of topic modeling
mainly from a computational perspective [3]. As an approach for topic
modeling, NMF works similar to LSI in that they both solve a matrix
decomposition problem given a particular rank value corresponding to
the number of topics. However, as the name suggests, NMF imposes
non-negativity constraints on every element of the resulting matrices
so that it can maintain interpretability.
The advantage of UTOPIAN is that NMF does not suffer from the
previously raised issues while providing results with comparable quality to those of LDA. In other words, although NMF is non-convex similar to LDA, its algorithm usually generates a consistent result from
multiple runs for a given document corpus (Section 6). Moreover, the
NMF algorithm is deterministic. Thus, unless the user modifies an initial specification, she will obtain the same result from the algorithm.
These desirable behaviors of NMF serve as important grounds to make
UTOPIAN practically useful and interactive in real-world visual analytics by enabling the user to progressively improve a particular result
by interactively changing the algorithm specifications, etc.
More importantly, another notable advantage of UTOPIAN is that
it can easily incorporate more active user interactions that are beyond changing parameters, initial values, etc., via various forms of
semi-supervisions on NMF. Thus, UTOPIAN provides these flexible

1993

interaction capabilities of NMF in improving the topic modeling result in a user-driven manner. The manner in which the adopted semisupervised NMF method takes the user interventions into account is
intuitive because the semi-supervision will be in the same form as the
two above-described topic modeling outputs which the user is already
familiar with throughout his/her analysis. This characteristic removes
any additional need for transforming the user interventions back to the
algorithm parameters or constraints in an ambiguous way.
Based on the semi-supervised NMF method, UTOPIAN provides a
wide variety of interaction capabilities for improving topic modeling.
UTOPIAN visualizes the NMF topic modeling result mainly in a nodelink diagram by using a variant of one of the state-of-the-art dimension reduction methods called t-distributed stochastic neighborhood
embedding (t-SNE) [34]. The provided interaction forms primarily
two types of semi-supervisions to the algorithm: keyword-based and
document-based ones, each of which can also be flexibly generated in
either a top-down or a bottom-up manner (Section 4). Furthermore,
in order to support real-time interactions with the topic modeling algorithm, UTOPIAN visualizes its intermediate outputs even before its
convergence, (Section 5.2). Finally, by using UTOPIAN, we show
several interesting usage scenarios where the topic modeling results
are interactively improved.
The main contributions of UTOPIAN are summarized as follows:
• Proposing NMF as a better alternative topic modeling method in
visual analytics compared to LDA.
• Developing a visual analytics system called UTOPIAN equipped
with various user interaction capabilities based on the semisupervised NMF.
• Presenting various usage scenarios using real-world data in
which the topic modeling result is improved via various user interactions.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses related work. Section 3 introduces NMF in the context of topic modeling. Section 4 presents the user interactions for improving topic modeling using NMF. Section 5 describes UTOPIAN supporting these user
interactions. Section 6 shows detailed quantitative results about the algorithm behaviors of LDA and NMF. Section 7 presents several usage
scenarios with UTOPIAN. Finally, Section 8 concludes the paper with
some future work.
2

R ELATED W ORK

The primary goal of discovering topics in document collections is to
provide the user with a summary of a document corpus in terms of,
for example, keyword summaries of computed topics and a group of
documents closely related to each topic. Hence, topic modeling can
be viewed as a (soft) clustering in the sense that clustering also gives
groups of semantically coherent documents where the semantic meaning of each cluster can be represented as the most frequent keywords in
the document group. Therefore, our discussion in this section encompasses previous studies involving topic modeling as well as document
clustering in visual analytics.
A well-known visual document analysis system, IN-SPIRE [36],
shows the summaries of the topic clusters using standard clustering
and dimensionality algorithms such as k-means and principal component analysis (PCA) [21], respectively, to compute topic summaries.
However, IN-SPIRE does not support substantial interactions for improving topic clusters. Another widely-used system, Jigsaw [33], provides various capabilities such as summarizing document cluster views
and allows several basic interactions such as changing the number of
clusters and initializing seed documents of clusters. More recently,
various visual analytics systems involving an advanced topic modeling
method, LDA, have been proposed. TIARA [35], one of the first systems that applied LDA in visual analytics, has utilized a ThemeRiverstyle visualization to show the temporal trend of topic evolution. Other
work such as ParallelTopics [12] and TextFlow [10] have also aimed

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 19, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

1994

Notation
m
n
k
X ∈ Rm×n
+
W ∈ Rm×k
+
H ∈ Rk×n
+
wl ∈ Rm×1
+
hi ∈ Rk×1
+
V ∈ Rm×k
+
G ∈ Rk×n
+
vl ∈ Rm×1
+
gi ∈ Rk×1
+
MW ∈ Rk×k
+
n×n
MH ∈ R+
(l)
MW

Table 1. Notations in the Paper
Description
the number of keywords
the number of documents
the number of topics
A term-by-document matrix
A term-by-topic matrix
A topic-by-document matrix
A keyword-wise representation of the l-th topic
A topic-wise representation of document i
A reference term-by-topic matrix for W
A reference topic-by-document matrix for G
A reference vector for wl
A reference vector for hi
A mask/weight matrix for the columns of W
A mask/weight matrix for the columns of H
A mask/weight value for wl

where W ∈ Rm×k
and H ∈ Rk×n
are nonnegative factors. NMF is
+
+
typically formulated in terms of the Frobenius norm as
min kX −W Hk2F .

W, H≥0

where ′ ≥′ applies to every element of the given matrix in the lefthand side. In the topic modeling context, xi ∈ Rm×1
+ , the i-th column
of X, corresponds to the bag-of-words representation of document i
with respect to m keywords, possibly with some pre-processing, e.g.,
inverse-document frequency weighting and column-wise l2 -norm normalization. k corresponds to the number of topics. wl ∈ Rm×1
+ , the
l-th nonnegative column vector of W , represents the l-th topic as a
weighted combination of m keywords. A large value indicates a close
relationship of the topic to the corresponding keyword. hi ∈ Rk×1
+ , the
i-th column vector of H, represents document i as a weighted combination of k topics.
3.2 NMF for Topic Modeling

(i)

MH
A mask/weight value for hi
at capturing the topic changes and understanding the document characteristics based on LDA. Specifically, TextFlow handles merging and
splitting topics over time as well as detects emerging/diminishing topics. In most of these studies, however, the main focus lies in how
effectively the LDA results can be utilized in their applications, but
not the interactions with a topic modeling itself for improving its result. As noted in recent work in the machine learning domain [1, 20],
incorporating domain knowledge into topic modeling via user interactions can be a cumbersome process.
On the other hand, there have been many studies that have tried
to improve clustering or topic modeling results in document analysis
through user interactions. Such interactive clustering approaches go
well beyond the standard document analysis [18, 29, 5]. The importance and the need for an interactive visual exploration for text document collection have also been gaining a lot of interest in recent years
[13, 16, 15]. Similar to our approach, several studies have actively
used node-link diagrams, which visualize documents along with their
clusters, allowing users to interactively create a hierarchical structure
of topic clusters [27, 31]. iCluster [14] lets the user manually perform
clustering from scratch based on the recommended documents computed by the system. Although it may be inefficient in large-scale
data, the user can maintain semantically meaningful topic clusters,
and the system can reflect user feedback at every step of performing
clustering for individual documents. iVisClustering [26] is another visual analytics system for document clustering using LDA. It provides
a few capabilities to directly interact with LDA, such as manipulating the topical keyword weights and merging/splitting topic clusters,
etc. However, most of these LDA-based systems suffer from the previously discussed problems, and due to the significant running time of
LDA, most computations are done off-line, and real-time interactions
with LDA is difficult. In contrast, NMF, which does not suffer from
these problems, has never been systematically explored in the context
of visual analytics. In this regard, UTOPIAN is one of the first such
systems based on NMF for document topic modeling that supports
various user interactions in real-time visual environments.
3

N ONNEGATIVE M ATRIX FACTORIZATION (NMF)
M ODELING

FOR

TOPIC

In this section, we introduce NMF in the context of topic modeling
and compare it with widely-used probabilistic topic modeling. The
notations used in the paper is summarized in Table 1.
3.1 Formulation
Given a nonnegative matrix X ∈ Rm×n
+ , and an integer k ≪ min (m, n),
NMF finds a lower-rank approximation given by
X ≈ W H,

(2)

(1)

Compared to standard topic modeling methods such as p-LSI and
LDA, NMF essentially gives the same output types, (1) a keywordwise topic representation, e.g., wl , and (2) a topic-wise document representation, e.g., hi . The only difference, however, is that wl and hi
are not necessarily column-normalized (meaning summing up to one)
unlike the p-LSI and LDA outputs. Nonetheless, such a difference
is negligible in that Eq. (1) can be manipulated via diagonal scaling
matrices as


−1
X ≈ W H = (W DW ) DW
H = Ŵ Ĥ
where the (l, l)-th entry of the diagonal matrix Dw ∈ Rk×k
+ corresponds
to the sum of wl . Now the new matrix Ŵ is column-normalized, giving an equivalent output to the first outputs from p-LSI and LDA, but
the second output Ĥ is still not column-normalized. The column normalization on Ĥ does not affect the interpretation of each document in
terms of its relative relationships to topics. In this sense, NMF can be
used as an alternative to standard topic modeling methods.
4

U SER I NTERACTIONS

VIA

S EMI - SUPERVISED NMF

In this section, we first describe a semi-supervised NMF (SS-NMF)
that can flexibly support various user interactions in UTOPIAN. We
then propose a set of user interactions and describe how they are performed via SS-NMF formulations.
4.1 Semi-supervised NMF (SS-NMF)
In addition to the original NMF inputs, X and k, SS-NMF takes additional inputs as reference matrices, V ∈ Rm×k
and G ∈ Rk×n
+
+ for W and
n×n
H, respectively, and diagonal matrices MW ∈ Rk×k
and
MH ∈ R+
,
+
which assign weights on the columns of V and G, respectively. Given
these inputs, SS-NMF includes additional terms that penalize the difference between G and H (up to row-wise scaling via DH ) and that
between V and W as
n
kX −W Hk2F
minW, H, DH ≥0
o
+ k(W −V ) MW k2F + k(H − GDH ) MH k2F (3)
for nonnegative factors W ∈ Rm×k
and H ∈ Rk×n
+
+ and a diagonal man×n
trix DH ∈ R+
.
Basically, Eq. (3) regularizes/supervises the resulting W and H to be
as close as possible to V and G, respectively, while still approximating
the input matrix X as W H. More specifically, wl and hi are enforced
to be close to vl ∈ Rm×1 , the l-th column vector of V , and gi ∈ Rk×1 ,
the i-th column vector of G, respectively. The diagonal matrix DH
plays a role of automatically adjusting the scales between hi ’s and gi ’s.
Note that as discussed in Section 3, DH does not change the relative
topical weight values, and thus the effect of DH can be ignored when
interpreting the topic modeling results of SS-NMF.

CHOO ET AL: UTOPIAN: USER-DRIVEN TOPIC MODELING BASED ON INTERACTIVE NONNEGATIVE MATRIX

MW and MH enable such supervision to be applied selectively on a
subset of columns of W and H when the corresponding diagonal en(l)
tries of MW and MH are set to zeros. In other words, when MW , the
(l, l)-th entry of MW , is set to zero, no supervision on wl is imposed.
(i)
Likewise, when MH , the (i, i)-th entry of MH , is set to zero, no supervision on hi is imposed. On the other hand, larger diagonal values of
MW and MH supervise more strongly the corresponding columns of W
and H, respectively.
When used in interactive topic modeling, the reference information
represented in V and G represents the prior knowledge the user wants
to impose in the topic modeling output. On the one hand, by setting
only a few nonzero entries in MW and MH for partial supervision, the
user can selectively regularize particular topics instead of the entire
topics. On the other hand, by setting relatively small nonzero values
in MW and MH , the user can weakly supervise his/her knowledge into
the formulation in case she is not completly sure about what a topic
should look like.
4.2 Supported User Interactions
Even though the SS-NMF formulation provides a natural way to impose the user’s prior knowledge in topic modeling processes, it is nontrivial to design a semantically meaningful set of user interactions for
improving topic modeling. In this section, we propose a variety of such
user interactions based on SS-NMF as follows: (i) keyword refinement
of an existing topic, (ii) topic splitting/merging for interactive adjustment of the number of topics, and (iii) keyword-induced/documentinduced topic creation. The proposed user interactions are mostly on
an individual topic or document basis by generating an appropriate vl
or gi , respectively, with its corresponding nonzero weight values for
(l)
(i)
MW and MH . In the following, we describe each of the supported
user interactions.
Topic keyword refinement. This interaction enables the user to
change keyword weights so that she can directly refine the semantic meaning of a topic. That is, starting from wl , the user can increase/decrease or even remove the weights of particular keywords and
(l)
set the modified vector to vl along with a nonzero MW . For instance,
suppose wl represents the distribution over three keywords, ‘apple,’
‘orange,’ and ‘banana,’ as (1.3, 0.6, 0.1). If the user wants to completely remove the term ‘banana’ from the meaning of this topic, she
can set vl to (1.3, 0.6, 0). On the other hand, if she wants this topic
to be more closely related to ‘orange,’ then she may set vl to (1.3,
1.6, 0.1). Such reference information affects the subsequent running
of SS-NMF.
Topic merging. This interaction allows the user to merge similar
topics into a single one. Our approach to achieve this interaction is to
generate gi from hi as follows. We first identify the documents related
most closely to either of the merged topics, which are essentially the
documents that are hard-clustered to the merged topics. For these documents, we obtain their hi ’s and merge the values corresponding to the
two merged topics by adding them up to a single value, and set gi ’s to
the resulting hi ’s. For instance, suppose two documents, whose hi ’s are
represented as (0.7, 0.2, 0.1) and (0.3, 0.5, 0.2), respectively, in terms
of the three topics. When merging topic 1 and 2, the corresponding
gi ’s would be set to (0.7+0.2, 0.1) and (0.3+0.5, 0.2), respectively, in
terms of the merged topic and topic 3.
Notice that even though our merging algorithm is document-based,
the keywords associated with the representation of the merged topics
in terms of keywords are adjusted accordingly, which could potentially
make the merged topic bring new documents in and/or exclude existing
documents out.
Topic splitting. In this interaction, we provide a capability to split a
topic into two in a user-driven way. In this interaction, we assume the
user expect the two split topics share a common semantic meaning at a
high level but with minor differences in their details. More specifically,
suppose the user wants to split a particular topic wl , into two topics
wa and wb . We first initialize the reference vectors va and vb for the
two split topics as wl . Afterwards, we let users manipulate these two
topic vectors via the topic keyword refinement interaction so that the

1995

splitting process can reflect the user’s intention. For instance, given
the same keyword-wise representations of two split topics, the user
might want to increase the weight of a particular keyword in the first
one while decreasing/removing the weight of the same keyword in the
second one. Based on the reference information va and vb generated
in this manner, the subsequent running of SS-NMF performs the topic
splitting process.
Document-induced topic creation. This interaction constructs a
topic based on a small number of exemplar documents of the user’s
choice. In this interaction, for those documents specified as exemplars
by the user, the corresponding gi ’s are initialized to zero vectors but are
set to one for the value corresponding to the newly created topic. For
instance, when the current number of topics is k, gi ’s are set to a (k +
1)-dimensional vector where the first k entries are zeros but the last
entry is set to one, assuming the (k + 1)-th topic is the newly created
one. Such a process enforces the exemplar documents to be related
purely to the newly created topic. Using this reference information,
SS-NMF forms a new keyword-wise topic representation for a new
topic, and accordingly the relevant documents to the exemplars.
Keyword-induced topic creation. This interaction provides a way
to create a topic based on a small set of keywords of the user’s interest. In this interaction, we assume that the user is given the topic
summaries in terms of the keywords with the largest weight in the
keyword-wise topic representation wl . With this interaction, the user
can select several interesting keywords and create a topic based on
them. For its formulation using SS-NMF, we initialize the reference
information vl of a newly created topic as a zero vector. Then, for the
user-selected keywords, we set their corresponding values as ones in
vl . In this manner, the resulting wl is enforced to be related mainly
to these keywords. As a result, the documents closely related to these
keywords are included in this topic.
4.3 Perspectives of Supported User Interactions
So far, we have mainly presented various user interactions in terms
of how they can be formulated as the reference information about the
topic modeling outputs in SS-NMF. Depending on how we generate
such reference information, we discuss the above-described user interactions from the following perspectives.
Keyword-based vs. document-based. The user interactions can
be formulated using the reference information for either the keywordwise topic representation or the topic-wise document representation.
Keyword-based interactions refer to those manipulating the reference
information vl about the keyword-wise topic representation wl of a
particular topic. On the other hand, document-based interactions refer
to those manipulating the reference information gi about the topicwise document representation hi of a particular document. From this
perspective, topic keyword refinement, topic splitting, and keywordinduced topic creation are keyword-based while topic merging and
document-induced topic creation are document-based.
Nonetheless, in most topic modeling methods including NMF, the
two main outputs of topic modeling are interdependent. In other
words, a change of any one of them affects the other. Therefore, some
interactions can be formulated in the other way. For example, topic
splitting can be performed based on the user interaction of splitting
the documents in one topic into two groups, which would then be a
document-based formulation. In addition, topic merging may also be
formulated as an averaged keyword-wise topic representation of the
two, which would be keyword-based. However, after experimenting
all these various options, we found the proposed approaches for the
above interactions reflect the user intention properly in terms of the
SS-NMF algorithm behavior.
Template-based (top-down) vs. from-scratch-based (bottomup). The user interactions can also be characterized in terms of how
we form the reference information about the topic modeling output.
Template-based interactions refer to those starting from a current topic
modeling output wl or hi (as a template) and manipulating it to generate the reference information vl or gi . On the other hand, from-scratchbased interactions refer to those starting from a completely zero vector
of the reference information vl or gi and putting nonzero values only in

1996

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 19, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

the entries that the user specifies. From this perspective, topic keyword
refinement, topic merging, and topic splitting are template-based while
document-induced topic creation and keyword-induced topic creation
are document-based.
In general, these two methods contrast in terms of the quality and
the efficiency when generating the reference information via a user interaction. That is, the template-based approach has an advantage of
being able to efficiently create the reference information by using the
already-built topic modeling output, which would contain most keywords and topics with nonzero weight values in wl and hi , respectively.
After doing so, the user can gradually refine the reference information.
This approach, however, may suffer from the poor quality of an initial
topic modeling output.
On the other hand, the from-scratch-based method does not have
this problem since the reference information do not involve any information from the topic modeling output. Instead, the reference information starts from a completely zero vector, and it is created entirely
as what the user specifies. For instance, from the perspective of the SSNMF algorithm, topic keyword refinement and keyword-induced topic
creation has no difference in that both of them create the reference
information vl about wl . However, the latter, which is a from-scratchbased method, does not allow any keywords to be involved other than
the user-specified keywords because we set nonzero values in vl only
for the corresponding keywords. In this sense, the from-scratch-based
method can maintain the quality of the reference information based on
the user intention, but it may be inefficient to involve a large number
of keywords or documents in the reference information since the user
has to manually go through all the processes.
5 UTOPIAN
UTOPIAN1 visually presents the SS-NMF result in a node-link diagram in which the displayed points represent individual documents
with color-coding their (hard-clustered) topic cluster labels. Additionally, we provide the summary of topic clusters in terms of their most
representative keywords. Given a visualization created in this manner,
the user can perform the above-described interactions to improve the
topic modeling result. UTOPIAN has three key features:
• Modified t-distributed stochastic neighborhood embedding (tSNE) as a layout algorithm for proper visualization of documents
and their topics
• Visualization of the intermediate algorithm outputs for real-time
visualization and responsive interaction with NMF
• Animated visualization of explicit topic cluster changes for
tracking the progression of the topic modeling outputs
5.1 Modified t-distributed Stochastic Neighborhood Embedding (t-SNE)
In a visual analytics approach, it is important for the user to be able
to visually understand and interact with the topic modeling results. As
our main visual layout algorithm to visualize documents along with
their topic modeling outputs in a node-link diagram form, we have
chosen one of the state-of-the-art methods called t-distributed stochastic neighborhood embedding (t-SNE) [34]. Given high-dimensional
vectors of data items or their pairwise similarity values, t-SNE computes a 2D layout that reflects the high-dimensional relationships or
the given pairwise similarities in terms of their 2D Euclidean distances. When applied in document data, their bag-of-words representations or their cosine similarity measures are typically used as an input
to t-SNE.
The main reason we have chosen t-SNE rather than other standard
techniques such as principal component analysis [21] and multidimensional scaling [23] is that t-SNE has shown its outstanding capabilities
in revealing the implicit groupings of data items in visualization applications [34]. However, we found that t-SNE often generate a nodelink diagram for document data where different topic clusters severely
1 http://fodava.gatech.edu/UTOPIAN

(a) The original t-SNE

(b) The modified t-SNE

Fig. 2. A comparison between the original and the modified t-SNE.
The modified t-SNE (b) with a shrinkage parameter value of 0.4 shows
a much clearer structure of topic clusters than the original t-SNE (a).
UTOPIAN provides a slider interface to control the shrinkage parameter value. In addition, the edges have been drawn for the pairs of data
points whose distances are closer than a user-specified threshold. 515
documents of the InfoVis-VAST data set have been used.
overlap, as shown in Fig. 2(a), making it difficult to analyze the topicvs-topic and/or topic-vs-document relationships. To overcome this
problem, we adopted a supervision idea in dimension reduction, such
as linear discriminant analysis [19], which tries to represent the clear
cluster structure in dimension reduction results. Although this kind
of behavior may distort the original relationships of data items, it has
been shown to be useful in visualization applications in various domains [6, 7].
In detail, we have modified the original t-SNE algorithm so that they
can better show the cluster structure in noisy data sets such as documents. Suppose di j denotes the pairwise distance between documents
i and j to be used as an input to t-SNE. Given a topic cluster index obtained by applying hard-clustering to the topic modeling result, if these
two documents belong to the same topic cluster, then we decrease their
pairwise distance by a factor of α , i.e., α di j where α is a pre-defined
parameter value between zero and one. By default, the shrinking parameter α is set to 0.4, but the user can interactively change it via a
slider interface in UTOPIAN. In this manner, the pairwise distance input to t-SNE now represents each cluster more compactly, resulting
in a clearer visualization of the cluster structure. Fig. 2(b) shows an
example visualization when applying the proposed modification to tSNE. As we can see, the topic clusters are shown much better than
Fig. 2(a).
5.2 Visualization of the Intermediate Algorithm Outputs
for Real-time Interactive Visualization
The real-time interaction capability is crucial in making continuous
interactions efficiently based on highly exploratory nature in visual
analytics. To achieve this goal, UTOPIAN is designed to reflect the
intermediate algorithm outputs of NMF and t-SNE as soon as they
are available [9]. Furthermore, once the user performs a particular interaction, the algorithm responds immediately to the user interaction
from the immediate next iterations. In this manner, she can obtain its
effects of the algorithm in real time. However, one potential drawback of this approach is that the visualization/rendering process may
be burdensome since it has to be performed repetitively over the iterations instead of only once after the final iteration. To overcome this
issue, we adopt a multi-threading approach to separate computational
and visualization processes into different threads that can be efficiently
executed simultaneously.
However, it is not straightforward to adopt this idea because
UTOPIAN involves two computational modules and one of them (tSNE) is dependent on the other (SS-NMF) due to the modification described in Section 5.1. Therefore, we further develop this idea so that
it can handle two dependent computational modules simultaneously.
Basically, we now have two separate threads for SS-NMF and t-SNE
and another for visualization/rendering. Between the t-SNE and the
visualization threads, the iteration-wise computational visualization

CHOO ET AL: UTOPIAN: USER-DRIVEN TOPIC MODELING BASED ON INTERACTIVE NONNEGATIVE MATRIX

Table 2. The Summary of the Data Sets Used in the Paper
InfoVis-VAST

#docs
#words

515
5,935

Car Reviews
231
3,142

TV Reviews
110
1,624

20News
2,211
23,604

method is applied in a straightforward manner. That is, when an intermediate output of t-SNE, which is a set of 2D representations of the
documents, is available, the visualization thread updates the node-link
diagram view. In addition, once an intermediate output of SS-NMF is
generated, it causes the t-SNE module to restart because of the new input distance information due to the topic cluster membership changes.
During this process, the latest output of t-SNE from the previous run
of t-SNE is used as an initial value for the next run of t-SNE in order
to avoid a significant change in the view.
While the view updates continuously based on the intermediate outputs of t-SNE as well as SS-NMF, the user can perform any supported user interactions, which will essentially restart SS-NMF using
the newly created reference information. Similar to the restarting process of t-SNE, we set the initial value of the new run of SS-NMF as
the latest output of the previous run of SS-NMF. Afterwards, the intermediate results of SS-NMF from iterations will immediately affect
the t-SNE module and then the visualization module. In this manner, the SS-NMF module can be responsive due to user interactions in
real-time.

5.3 Animated Visualization of Explicit Topic cluster
Changes
During a sequence of user interactions, documents often change their
topic cluster memberships. In UTOPIAN, such changes assign different colors to data points (representing new topic cluster indices), and
their 2D coordinates computed by our modified t-SNE often change
significantly. In order to preserve the user’s mental map to track these
changes [2], UTOPIAN visualizes their smooth transitions via animation. Furthermore, we explicitly encode the topic cluster changes of
a data point by filling the left half of the point circle as the original
cluster index and the right half as the new cluster index.2

5.4 Implementation Details
UTOPIAN is primarily implemented in JAVA for front-end UI’s and
rendering modules, which are mainly based on the FODAVA testbed
system [8]. NetBeans Rich Client Platform and IDE3 have been used
for a flexible window management. The back-end computational modules of SS-NMF and t-SNE are written in MATLAB, and they interface
with the front-end JAVA module via the ‘matlabcontrol’ library.4 For
animation effects, we have used the ‘trident’ library.5

6

Q UANTITATIVE A NALYSIS

We present quantitative comparisons between the LDA and the NMF
algorithms from the two practical viewpoints: (1) consistency from
multiple runs and (2) empirical convergence (as opposed to the algorithmic convergence). By the former, we mean how consistent results
the algorithm generates among multiple runs while by the latter, we
mean how fast the algorithm converges from a human’s practical viewpoint.
In terms of the algorithm implementation, we use a widely-accepted
LDA implementation called Mallet [28] the algorithm of which is
based on a Gibbs sampling method [32]. For NMF, we have used
one of the fastest and numerically reliable implementation based on
an active set type of a least squares method [22].6 For both methods,
random initialization provided by each algorithm has been used.

1997

6.1 Data Sets
We have chosen four document data sets: the InfoVis-VAST, the Car
Reviews, the TV Reviews, and the 20News data sets. The InfoVisVAST data set7 is a collection of academic papers published in IEEE
InfoVis (1995-2010) and VAST (2006-2010) conferences. The Car
Reviews data set contains a set of reviews about 2009 Hyundai Genesis car collected from Edmunds.com, and the TV Reviews data set is
another product review document set about a particular Samsung TV
collected from Amazon.com. Finally, the 20News data set8 is a collection of newsgroup documents composed of 20 topics. Notice that
the 20News data set is relatively well clustered with pre-defined topic
cluster labels. The size of these data sets are summarized in Table 2.
After the data sets are encoded using a bag-of-words representation,
we pre-processed them using tf-idf and unit L2 -norm normalization.
6.2 Consistency from Multiple Runs
In this experiment, we have run the LDA and the NMF algorithms
multiple times on the four data sets. After obtaining ten sets of the
topic modeling results from each algorithm, for each pair of the result
sets within a particular algorithm, we have measured the number of the
topic cluster memberships of individual documents that did not agree
and averaged such a measure over 45 pairs out of ten sets. To this
end, we have applied the Hungarian algorithm [24] to match the two
independently generated cluster index sets.
Fig. 3 shows the relative number of averaged topic cluster membership changes out of the total number of documents depending on
the number of topics for each data set. In the first three data sets, it is
shown that using NMF, about 10-25% of the entire documents changed
their topic cluster memberships while using LDA, the corresponding
value was much high, e.g., around 60-85%. It indicates that the user
will observe significant topic cluster membership changes each time
running LDA whereas the changes are relatively minor in the case of
NMF.
Compared to the first three data sets, however, in the 20News data
set, the number of topic cluster membership changes in LDA decreases
to around 30%. NMF also performs better than the previous data sets,
but the performance improvement is not significant compared to LDA.
Interestingly, this observation tells us that LDA tends to give more
consistent results for the data sets composed of clear topics such as the
20News data set. However, in many real-world data sets, the topics are
often not clearly defined due to the presence of a significant amount
of noise, which makes NMF more viable for analyzing the real-world
data in a visual analytic environment.
Such inconsistent behaviors of LDA can also be shown by the topic
summary that each algorithm generates. For example, Table 2 shows
the topic summaries from the two result sets from the InfoVis-VAST
data set. In the case of NMF, the topic summaries are shown to be exactly the same, but LDA varies significantly for some topics. For example, topic 2 is shown to have completely different topic summaries
(‘knowledge, edge’ vs. ‘analysts, scatterplot’), and so is topic 4 (‘social, tree’ vs. ‘text, document’).
These experimental results implies important practical concerns
about LDA when used in visual analytics domains since the user cannot assure that the LDA result at hand is the best one for his/her analysis. For example, one LDA result may fail to reveal a particular topic
of interest while some other ones can. To overcome this issue, the user
could run LDA multiple times and see if any interesting differences
arise, but this process could become time-consuming due to a significant running time of LDA and a nontrivial task of comparing between
different LDA results.
2 For

more details, please refer to the accompanying video.

3 http://netbeans.org/features/platform/index.html
4 https://code.google.com/p/matlabcontrol
5 https://kenai.com/projects/trident/pages/Home
6 http://www.cc.gatech.edu/

˜hpark/nmfsoftware.php.

7 http://www.cc.gatech.edu/gvu/ii/jigsaw/datafiles.

html
8 http://qwone.com/ jason/20Newsgroups
˜

NMF
LDA

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

5

10
Number of Clusters

1

NMF
LDA

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

15

(a) The InfoVis-VAST data set

7

10
Number of Clusters

1

Relative Cluster Membership Changes

Relative Cluster Membership Changes

Relative Cluster Membership Changes

1

Relative Cluster Membership Changes

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 19, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

1998

NMF
LDA

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

13

(b) The Car Reviews data set

0

3

5
Number of Clusters

7

(c) The TV Review data set

1

NMF
LDA

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

10

20
Number of Clusters

30

(d) The 20News data set

Fig. 3. The relative topic cluster membership changes with respect to the total number of documents. The presented results are averaged values
among the sets of cluster membership results from running each algorithm ten times with different numbers of clusters.
Table 3. Topic Summaries from the Two Runs of NMF and LDA
Topic 3
analysis,system
analysis,system

NMF
Topic 4
graph,layout
graph,layout

Topic 5
visual,analytics
visual,analytics

Topic 6
data,sets
data,sets

Topic 7
color,weaving
color,weaving

Topic 1
documents,similarities
documents,query

Topic 2
knowledge,edge
analysts,scatterplot

Topic 3
query,collaborative
spatial,collaborative

LDA
Topic 4
social,tree
text,documents

Topic 5
measures,multivariate
multidimensional,high

Topic 6
tree,animation
tree,aggregation

Topic 7
dimensions,treemap
dimensions,treemap

30
25
20
15
10
5
0
0

0.5

1
Iterations

1.5

2
4

x 10

(a) LDA

Relative Cluster Membership Changes

Topic 2
information,user
information,user

Relative Cluster Membership Changes

Topic 1
visualization,design
visualization,design

30
25
20
15
10
5
0
0

100

200
Iterations

300

400

(b) NMF

Fig. 4. The relative topic cluster membership changes between the
two consecutive iterations on the InfoVis-VAST data set using LDA
and NMF. The number of topics is set to seven.
6.3 Empirical Convergence
Now, we have analyzed the convergence behavior of each algorithm
using a practically meaningful measure to a human’s perception rather
than the algorithm’s own objective or criterion values. As the measure, we have used the relative number of topic cluster membership
changes between iterations out of the entire documents. In the case of
NMF, we computed this measure until the NMF algorithm converges
based on its own convergence criteria that are well designed from their
theoretical and numerical analysis. In the case of the LDA algorithm
implemented in Mallet, we did not find any convergence or stopping
criteria other than a fixed number of iterations. By default, Mallet is
set to run 2,000 iterations, but in our experiments, we have run 20,000
iterations, which we think of as a sufficiently large number of iterations.
Fig. 4 shows the relative number of averaged topic cluster membership changes between the two consecutive iterations for the InfoVisVAST data set.9 Surprisingly, even after numerous iterations (20,000),
it is shown that around 10-15% of the total documents change their
topic cluster memberships at every iteration, showing practically no
convergence at all. This is partly because of the Randomness nature
of the sampling-based LDA algorithm, which we briefly mentioned in
Section . In other words, each iteration is mainly performed by drawing samples from a particular distribution, which is expected to converge or to be stable as iterations go on. However, the result indicates
9 Due to a page limit, we omitted the results of the other data sets. The
overall behaviors of them were similar to the InfoVis-VAST data set.

it is not the case.
This Randomness nature of the LDA algorithm basically gives the
user no control over the algorithm process. To be specific, suppose
the user obtained one LDA result from a particular run, but she wants
to improve the result by slightly modifying an initial specification of
the LDA algorithm, such as an initialization and a parameter of LDA.
However, such a user intervention may yield a completely different result from what the user previously had since the sampling-based LDA
algorithm is affected not only by an initial specification but also by
the samples randomly generated at each iteration. In contrast, in most
deterministic algorithms such as the NMF one we used, as long as the
user fixes the initial specification, the result can be replicated, and thus
the user can isolate and control the effects of his/her intervention while
running an algorithm.
Now let us discuss about the behavior of the NMF algorithm shown
in Fig. 4(b). When converged (at 389 iterations), NMF does not show
such undesirable behaviors of LDA, giving a stable result with no topic
cluster membership changes. More importantly, using NMF, the number of cluster membership changes decreases quite quickly to almost
zero at early iterations, e.g., around 60 iterations out of 389 in total. It
indicates that the user can get most information from NMF at a much
shorter period of time than that required for a full convergence of the
NMF algorithm. This behavior justifies the usefulness of the adopted
iteration-wise visualization framework (Section 5.2) so that the user
can immediately analyze the NMF result and perform various interactions in real-time.
6.4 Running Time
We will now briefly present the running time taken in the experiments
shown in Fig. 4. While LDA has taken about 10 minutes for 20,000 iterations, NMF has taken 48 seconds until the convergence. In the case
of LDA, if the number of iterations is set to a smaller value, the running time linearly decreases, but in general, we found that the running
time of NMF is still much faster than LDA, which gives another practical advantage of NMF over LDA especially in the context of visual
analytics.
7

U SAGE S CENARIOS

In this section, we present several usage scenarios showing the user interaction capabilities of UTOPIAN, which is based on SS-NMF (Section 4), for improving the topic modeling result in a user-driven manner.

CHOO ET AL: UTOPIAN: USER-DRIVEN TOPIC MODELING BASED ON INTERACTIVE NONNEGATIVE MATRIX

1999

7.1 The TV Reviews Data
As shown in Fig. 5, we performed several user interactions to have
better understanding about the data. First, we have initially run the
NMF topic modeling with five topics. As shown in Fig. 5(a), the initial
result from the NMF topic modeling reveals interesting topic clusters
from the data set. For example, the topic labeled as ‘delivery, service,
amazon’ mainly talks about the delivery service from ‘Amazon.com.’
Another one labeled as ‘money, worth, spent’ generally mentions that
people are satisfied with the price, e.g., “Well worth the money spent!”.
Now, we focused on the cluster labeled as ‘television, excellent,
product,’ which would likely contain positive reviews about the product. However, the keyword such as ‘television’ is not much meaningful
in this data set. Therefore, we performed topic keyword refinement for
removing this keyword but instead increasing the weight of the keyword ‘recommended’ originally ranked as the 11-th keyword. As seen
in Fig. 5(b), the resulting topic is now labeled as ‘excellent, product,
recommended’ reflecting this refinement process.
More interestingly, we found one document that has moved from
this topic cluster to another labeled as ‘dvd, problem, sound.’ After
reading this review, we found that this document, which starts by saying “Do not buy this TV!!”, indeed discussed mostly the negative features of the product. Now, we decide to study and understand the negative aspects of this product, and thus, we have performed documentinduced topic creation with this document. As seen in Fig. 5(c), the
newly created topic labeled as ‘repair, problem, stopped’ cluster has
been created, and in this topic, we have found three new documents
that mainly mention about the problematic issues such as the lengthy
time taken during a warranty repair, a loud noise from speakers, pinkand green-colored dead pixels, a connectivity issue with a Verizon
FIOS set-top box.

are shown to be similar, and thus we have merged these topics (black
circles in Fig. 7(b)). On the other hand, we have split the topic cluster labeled as ‘dimensions, multivariate, parallel’ in order to further
look into the specific research about ‘dimension reduction’ and that
about ‘cluster analysis.’ After performing such interactions, we have
found the topics have been properly merged/split as expected. For instance, the papers such as ‘Interactive Visual Clustering of Large Collections of Trajectories’ and ‘ClusterSculptor: A Visual Analytics Tool
for High-Dimensional Data’ have been clustered to the ‘cluster analysis’ topic while the papers such as ‘A Rank-by-Feature Framework for
Unsupervised Multidimensional Data Exploration Using Low Dimensional Projections’ and ‘Interactive Dimensionality Reduction through
User-defined Combinations of Quality Metrics’ have been clustered to
the ‘dimension reduction’ topic. It should be noted that although we
manipulated only the keywords ‘dimension,’ ‘reduction,’ ‘cluster,’ the
relevant documents without these specific keywords have been properly clustered.
Next, we have focused on the cluster labeled as ‘graph, layout,
edge’ (a black rectangle in Fig. 7(b)). We performed keyword-induced
topic creation based on the keyword ‘edge’ to look into the research
about ‘edge’ in the context of graph visualization. Interestingly, the
result has shown the topic labeled as ‘edge, bundled, adjacencies,’
which implies that the edges in the graph are mainly used to represent
the adjacencies and edge bundling is one of the main research topics.
Although not reported, another keyword ‘crossings’ has been highly
ranked as the fifth one, which also makes sense in that edge crossings
are one of the main issues in graph visualization. The example papers
from this topic cluster include ‘Hierarchical Edge Bundles: Visualization of Adjacency Relations in Hierarchical Data’ and ‘Edgelens: An
Interactive Method for Managing Edge Congestion in Graphs.’

7.2 The Car Reviews Data
Using this data set, we describe the use cases of keyword-induced topic
creation and topic splitting. Given the initial result shown in Fig. 6(a),
an interesting topic cluster is the one labeled as ‘problem, shift, gears’
that could imply that this car largely has an issue with gear shifting.
As reading a few documents in this topic cluster, we found that many
reviews complain about the transmission/gear shifting system, e.g.,
“Rattling/grinding sound when driving at lower gears”, “The transmission clunks.”, “The Transmission shifting is a Nightmare and very
embarrassing!”.
Next, we wanted to see if there is any suspension-related problems,
and thus we have performed keyword-induced topic creation, by using
the keywords ‘problem’ and ‘suspension’ (black circles in Fig. 6(a)).
As a result, a new topic labeled as ‘suspension, problem, design’ has
now contained multiple documents (black circles in Fig. 6(c)) that
mentions about the suspension issue, e.g., “Jittery suspension.”, “Redesign the whole suspension system.”, “Suspension ruins the whole
car comfortability.”.
In addition, we performed topic splitting on an unclear topic labeled as ‘seats, mileage, passengers’ (a black triangle in Fig. 6(a)) by
manipulating the keywords as shown in Fig. 6(b). Due to this interaction, UTOPIAN properly split the clusters by isolating the reviews
mentioning the gas mileage, e.g., “great mileage for a 3.8L”, “I like
the gas mileage of the v6. hwy 28 mpg and 23-24 mixed driving.” vs.
the features about the seat, e.g., “add programmable front passenger
seat”, “cooled seats”.

8 C ONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
In this work, we presented an NMF-based interactive visual topic
modeling system called UTOPIAN. Compared to a widely-used topic
modeling method, LDA, NMF has many practical advantages from
the perspectives of consistency from multiple runs and early empirical
convergence. In addition, NMF can incorporate the user input based
on the semi-supervised formulation of it in an intuitive way. By utilizing the semi-supervised NMF, we provided five useful interaction
capabilities, topic keyword refinement, topic merging, topic splitting,
document-induced topic creation, and keyword-induced topic creation.
Next, we presented several key advantages of UTOPIAN such as the
modified t-SNE algorithm, the iteration-wise visualization of NMF
and t-SNE for supporting various user interactions in real-time. Finally, we demonstrated the capabilities of UTOPIAN by flexibly applying the supported interactions in several real-world data sets.
Beyond document analysis, UTOPIAN can be flexibly extended
in visual analytics for various other domains, such as bioinformatics,
network analysis, etc., owing to the its easy interpretation and interaction capabilities. As our future work, we plan to extend UTOPIAN for
dealing with streaming document data. In addition, instead of simple
keyword summaries, we plan to strengthen summarization capabilities
showing semantically meaningful phrases or representative sentences,
which would give the user much more comprehensive understanding
about the resulting topics. Finally, we plan to improve UTOPIAN for
handling a large-scale data based on a parallelized distributed NMF
algorithm.

7.3 The InfoVis-VAST Data
In this scenario, we utilize topic merging, topic splitting, and keywordinduced topic creation for the InfoVis-VAST data set. As can be seen
in Fig. 7(a), the initial result computed by NMF is quite comprehensive, revealing an overview about the research topics in information
visualization and visual analytics fields. For instance, the topic labeled
as ‘document, text, collections’ is shown to be mainly about text visualization, and the one labeled as ‘networks, traffic, social’ is shown to
be about social network visualization.
Among these clusters, several topic clusters such as the ones labeled as ‘treemaps, layout, hierarchical’ and ‘trees, hierarchy, node’

9 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The work of these authors was supported in part by the National
Science Foundation (NSF) grants CCF-0808863, IIS-1242304, and
IIS-1231742, and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
(DARPA) XDATA program grant FA8750-12-2-0309. Any opinions,
findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
NSF and DARPA. Finally, we would like to thank Juwon Drake and
Jaewon Drake for their significant help in improving the manuscript
and the video material.

2000

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 19, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2013

(a) The initial visualization

(b) The visualization after topic keyword refinement (c) The visualization after document-induced topic
creation

Fig. 5. The usage scenario with the TV Reviews data set. Given the initial visualization (a), we performed topic keyword refinement on the
highlighted topic containing the term ‘excellent’ by removing the term ‘TV’ and by increasing the weights of the term ‘recommended.’ Due to
this interaction, a single document (pointed by an arrow) has moved from this cluster to the other containing a keyword ‘problem’ (b). After
reading it, this document is shown to mostly complain about the product. Now, we performed document-induced topic creation by using this
document. As a result, three more documents that contain mostly negative reviews have joined this topic cluster, which is also reflected in the
keyword summary containing ‘repair’ and ‘stopped.’

(a) The initial visualization

(b) The visualization after topic keyword refinement (c) The visualization after keyword-induced topic creation and topic splitting

Fig. 6. The usage scenario with the Car Reviews data set. Given the initial visualization (a), we have performed keyword-induced topic creation
and topic splitting. For the former, in order to look into any suspension issues, we have chosen the keywords ‘suspension’ and ‘problem’ (black
circles) for a newly created topic (a). For the latter, we have split the unclear topic labeled as ‘seats, mileage, passengers’ (a black triangle) to the
two where we have excluded the keywords ‘seats’ and ‘passengers’ but increased the weights of ‘mileage’ and ‘gas’ in the left while doing the
opposite in the right (b). The result shows the newly created topic cluster about ‘suspension, problem’ and also the two well separated clusters
(c).

(a) The initial visualization

(b) The visualization after topic keyword refinement (c) The visualization after keyword-induced topic creation and topic splitting

Fig. 7. The usage scenario with the InfoVis-VAST data set. Given the initial visualization (a), we performed topic merging and topic splitting
and (b) and then keyword-induced topic creation (c). First, we merged the two topic clusters commonly dealing with hierarchical data (black
circles) and split the topic cluster about ‘multivariate data visualization’ (a triangle) to the one about ‘dimension reduction’ and the other about
‘clustering’ by increasing the weights for the corresponding terms (b). Afterwards, we performed keyword-induced topic creation based on a
keyword ‘edge’ in the cluster about ‘graph visualization’ (a rectangle). The final result reveals a newly created topic labeled as ‘edge, bundled,
adjacencies’ (c), revealing the relevant sub-topics such as edge bundling, edge crossing, etc.

CHOO ET AL: UTOPIAN: USER-DRIVEN TOPIC MODELING BASED ON INTERACTIVE NONNEGATIVE MATRIX

R EFERENCES
[1] D. Andrzejewski, X. Zhu, M. Craven, and B. Recht. A framework for
incorporating general domain knowledge into latent dirichlet allocation
using first-order logic. In Proc. the Twenty-Second International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence - Volume Volume Two, pages 1171–
1177, 2011.
[2] D. Archambault, H. Purchase, and B. Pinaud. Animation, small multiples, and the effect of mental map preservation in dynamic graphs. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 17(4):539–552,
2011.
[3] S. Arora, R. Ge, and A. Moitra. Learning topic models – going beyond
svd. In Proc. IEEE 53rd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
Science (FOCS), pages 1–10, 2012.
[4] D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan. Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3:993–1022, 2003.
[5] K. Chen and L. Liu. ivibrate: Interactive visualization-based framework
for clustering large datasets. ACM Transactions on Information Systems
(TOIS), 24(2):245–294, 2006.
[6] J. Choo, S. Bohn, and H. Park. Two-stage framework for visualization
of clustered high dimensional data. In Proc. IEEE Symposium on Visual
Analytics Science and Technology (VAST), pages 67–74, 2009.
[7] J. Choo, H. Lee, J. Kihm, and H. Park. iVisClassifier: An interactive
visual analytics system for classification based on supervised dimension
reduction. In IEEE Conference on Visual Analytics Science and Technology (VAST), pages 27–34, 2010.
[8] J. Choo, H. Lee, Z. Liu, J. Stasko, and H. Park. An interactive visual
testbed system for dimension reduction and clustering of large-scale highdimensional data. In Proc. SPIE 8654, Visualization and Data Analysis
(VDA), pages 1–15, feb 2013.
[9] J. Choo and H. Park. Customizing computational methods for visual
analytics with big data. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications,
33(4):22–28, 2013.
[10] W. Cui, S. Liu, L. Tan, C. Shi, Y. Song, Z. Gao, H. Qu, and X. Tong.
TextFlow: Towards better understanding of evolving topics in text. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 17:2412–2421,
2011.
[11] S. Deerwester, S. Dumais, G. Furnas, T. Landauer, and R. Harshman. Indexing by latent semantic analysis. Journal of the Society for Information
Science, 41:391–407, 1990.
[12] W. Dou, X. Wang, R. Chang, and W. Ribarsky. Paralleltopics: A probabilistic approach to exploring document collections. In Proc. IEEE Conference on Visual Analytics Science and Technology (VAST), pages 231–
240, 2011.
[13] W. Dou, X. Wang, D. Skau, W. Ribarsky, and M. X. Zhou. Leadline:
Interactive visual analysis of text data through event identification and
exploration. In Proc. IEEE Conference on Visual Analytics Science and
Technology (VAST), pages 93–102, 2012.
[14] S. M. Drucker, D. Fisher, and S. Basu. Helping users sort faster with
adaptive machine learning recommendations. In Proc. the 13th IFIP TC
13 International Conference on Human-computer Interaction (INTERACT) - Volume Part III, pages 187–203, 2011.
[15] Z. Geng, R. S. Laramee, F. Loizides, and G. Buchanan. Visual analysis of
document triage data. In Proc. International Conference on Information
Visualization Theory and Applications (IVAPP), pages 151–163, 2011.
[16] B. Gretarsson, J. Odonovan, S. Bostandjiev, T. Höllerer, A. Asuncion,
D. Newman, and P. Smyth. Topicnets: Visual analysis of large text corpora with topic modeling. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and
Technology (TIST), 3(2):23, 2012.
[17] T. Hofmann. Probabilistic latent semantic indexing. In Proc. the 22nd
Annual International ACM SIGIR conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR), pages 50–57, 1999.
[18] M. S. Hossain, P. K. R. Ojili, C. Grimm, R. Muller, L. T. Watson, and
N. Ramakrishnan. Scatter/gather clustering: Flexibly incorporating user
feedback to steer clustering results. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics, 18(12):2829–2838, 2012.
[19] P. Howland and H. Park. Generalizing discriminant analysis using the
generalized singular value decomposition. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 26(8):995–1006, 2004.
[20] Y. Hu, J. Boyd-Graber, and B. Satinoff. Interactive topic modeling. In
Proc. Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 248–257, 2011.
[21] I. T. Jolliffe. Principal Component Analysis. Springer-Verlag, New York,
1986.

2001

[22] J. Kim and H. Park. Fast nonnegative matrix factorization: An active-setlike method and comparisons. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing,
33(6):3261–3281, 2011.
[23] J. Kruskal. Multidimensional scaling by optimizing goodness of fit to a
nonmetric hypothesis. Psychometrika, 29:1–27, 1964.
[24] H. W. Kuhn. The hungarian method for the assignment problem. Naval
Research Logistics Quarterly, 2(1-2):83–97, 1955.
[25] D. D. Lee and H. S. Seung. Learning the parts of objects by non-negative
matrix factorization. Nature, 401:788–791, 1999.
[26] H. Lee, J. Kihm, J. Choo, J. Stasko, and H. Park. iVisClustering: An interactive visual document clustering via topic modeling. Computer Graphics Forum, 31(3pt3):1155–1164, 2012.
[27] A. Lopes, R. Pinho, F. Paulovich, and R. Minghim. Visual text mining
using association rules. Computers & Graphics, 31(3):316–326, 2007.
[28] A. K. McCallum. MALLET: A machine learning for language toolkit.
http://mallet.cs.umass.edu, 2002.
[29] E. J. Nam, Y. Han, K. Mueller, A. Zelenyuk, and D. Imre. Clustersculptor: A visual analytics tool for high-dimensional data. In Proc. IEEE
Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology (VAST), pages
75–82, 2007.
[30] P. Paatero and U. Tapper. Positive matrix factorization: a non-negative
factor model with optimal utilization of error estimates of data values.
Environmetrics, 5:111–126, 1994.
[31] F. Paulovich and R. Minghim. Hipp: A novel hierarchical point placement strategy and its application to the exploration of document collections. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
14(6):1229–1236, 2008.
[32] I. Porteous, D. Newman, A. Ihler, A. Asuncion, P. Smyth, and
M. Welling. Fast collapsed gibbs sampling for latent dirichlet allocation.
In Proc. the 14th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge
discovery and data mining, pages 569–577, 2008.
[33] J. Stasko, C. Görg, and Z. Liu. Jigsaw: supporting investigative analysis
through interactive visualization. Information Visualization, 7(2):118–
132, 2008.
[34] L. van der Maaten and G. Hinton. Visualizing data using t-SNE. Journal
of Machine Learning Research, 9:2579–2605, 2008.
[35] F. Wei, S. Liu, Y. Song, S. Pan, M. X. Zhou, W. Qian, L. Shi, L. Tan, and
Q. Zhang. TIARA: a visual exploratory text analytic system. In Proc. the
16th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery
and data mining, pages 153–162, 2010.
[36] J. A. Wise. The ecological approach to text visualization. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science, 50(13):1224–1233, 1999.

